RADICALLY SIMPLE STRENGTH


A PRACTICAL PLAN TO HELP AVERAGE GUYS BUILD AWESOME BODIES





PAUL HORN





Copyright © 2022 by Paul Horn

All rights reserved.

No portion of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except as permitted by U.S. copyright law.

This book is for informational and entertainment purposes only. The author is not a doctor—just a dude who has spent way too much time in the gym. Consult a licensed healthcare provider before starting any exercise or nutrition program.

Edited by Catherine E. Oliver and Luke Dempsey

www.hornstrength.com





For my parents, who thought “Paul Michael Horn” sounded like an author’s name. Thank you for everything.





CONTENTS





Introduction





1. Bros vs. Pros



2. Radical Simplicity



3. Agents of Change: Stress and Recovery



4. Realistic Goals and Expectations



5. Equipment



6. Establishing Your Starting Point



7. The Novice Program



8. The Intermediate Program



9. The Advanced Program



10. Radically Simple Nutrition



11. Eating for Size and Strength



12. Cut the Fat; Keep the Muscle



13. The Cycle Continues



14. The Mental Game



15. Your Best Body. Your Best Life.





Appendix



Resources



Safety



Dealing with Injuries and Layoffs



Testing Your Strength



Building a Home Gym



Useful Supplements



Recipes



Meal Plans



Shopping List



Acknowledgments



Get in touch





INTRODUCTION





I’m an obsessive people-watcher—I stare, I eavesdrop, hoping to get a glimpse into the lives of the strangers around me. It’s an annoying habit, particularly if I’m with company, but I can’t help myself.

A few years ago, while meeting some friends at a trendy bar in an area of Los Angeles known as “Silicon Beach”—now home to prominent tech companies that run platforms like Facebook, Google, YouTube, and Snapchat—a young guy across the room became the subject of one of my fixations. He looked like a software developer; he was in his late twenties, five-foot-seven, pudgy, with some intentional stubble on his face that desperately needed to be cleaned up. His jeans were a little too baggy for the current style, and his tight polo shirt didn’t do much to hide his belly.

I didn’t know his name, but he looked like a “Nate.”

I assumed that “Nate” was probably bright, perhaps a Stanford graduate or maybe a transplant from a fancy school on the East Coast. He likely pulled down a decent salary, had a nice apartment, and drove a better-than-average car, maybe even an entry-level Tesla. His poor posture, pasty complexion, and lack of any visible muscle definition suggested that his hobbies didn’t tend towards the physically demanding.

Nate was hanging out with a small group of mostly male friends, doing his best to appear like he was enjoying himself, but his sociable demeanor seemed forced. As a fellow introvert, I can spot that fake I’d-so-much-rather-be-at-home-right-now smile anywhere.

The music ricocheted off the walls, and the young women in Nate’s group danced with each other while he and his buddies, not exactly by choice, formed a circle around them. Nate swayed back and forth awkwardly, searching for the rhythm, occasionally throwing a hand up in the air while mouthing what lyrics he could remember. With his other hand, he clutched a drink close to his chest and took frequent sips, suggesting that were he not burdened with the glass, he’d unleash his real dance moves (a defensive tactic I’m quite familiar with).

Nate was in a cool L.A. bar, in the prime of his life, surrounded by beautiful people, all having a great time. But he looked dejected. Despite everything I assumed he had going for him—youth, a good job, vested stock options, a well-funded 401(k), supportive parents, and a couple of solid buddies—Nate didn’t carry himself with the confidence you might expect. My guess was that his apparent lack of self-esteem stemmed from not liking the way he looked.

It’s hard not to notice how you stack up physically in a place like Los Angeles—there are beautiful people everywhere. Just leaving your house to get a cup of coffee can be a major reality check when you find yourself standing in line behind the next as-yet-undiscovered Hollywood heartthrob. And if you’re a short, overweight dude like Nate, you’re going to be regularly reminded of your shortcomings.

At a certain point, some of the Nates of the world grow tired of being overlooked, ignored, and generally dissatisfied with their appearance, and they decide to do something about it. There’s often a pivotal moment—perhaps a photo taken at an unflattering angle, a playful poke in the belly from an attractive friend, or worse, a devastating rejection from a romantic interest—that ignites a fire within and a desire for change.

That’s typically where I come in.

I became a strength coach to help guys like Nate—regular dudes who desperately want to get in better shape, but who are confused, overwhelmed, and intimidated by the process. They have no interest in becoming record-setting powerlifters or juiced-up bodybuilding bros; they are average guys with normal lives who just want to be a little bigger and stronger without getting hurt. They’re eager to become better versions of themselves, to look in the mirror and like what they see, and to be able to take their shirts off at the beach or in the bedroom and not be embarrassed.

My typical client isn’t a former college football player or genetically gifted athlete. In fact, most of the guys in my gym never considered themselves to be particularly athletic at all. They are generally men who discovered fitness later in life after finally coming to terms with the fact that their lifestyle choices had left them with physiques that could desperately use some work.

By this point in my career, I’ve seen a lot of Nates walk through my doors. For almost a decade, I was the only Starting Strength Coach in Los Angeles. In 2013, after the rapid growth of the training business I started in my garage, I opened Horn Strength & Conditioning—the first Starting Strength Affiliate Gym on the West Coast. Eight years later, when the COVID-19 pandemic forced me to close my business, I moved to Idaho and accepted the role of head coach at Starting Strength Boise.

If you’re unfamiliar with Starting Strength, you’re not alone. But if you’ve ever typed “How do I get strong?” or “How to lift weights” into a search engine, you’ve probably come across the name. The Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training textbook, authored by my coach, mentor, and friend Mark Rippetoe (a.k.a. “Rip”), has sold well over half a million copies and has been translated into several languages. The book distills over forty years of Rip’s experience as a professional strength and conditioning coach and gym owner into a thoughtful, detailed explanation of why someone should lift weights—specifically, barbells—to develop their physical strength.

While Rip’s witty writing style keeps the otherwise dry material more entertaining than one might expect, the book is not a light read. Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training is a deep dive into the anatomy, physiology, biomechanics, and theory of barbell-based strength training. But because the book devotes more than sixty pages to how to perform a squat correctly, and many people never do more than skim those pages, I’ve built a successful career explaining what’s in the book and guiding my clients through the program.

Despite the length and breadth of the book, the Starting Strength method is surprisingly simple. The program uses just five exercises. At each workout, trainees try to lift a little more weight than they did the previous time, and just like the proverbial Milo of Croton hoisting a growing calf over his head, they get predictably stronger. It’s the simplicity of the program that attracts engineers, scientists, lawyers, accountants, and software developers—nerdy guys who like data and a well-thought-out system.

In my gym, a typical client’s journey starts with a quick consultation to learn about his goals and reasons for coming in. It’s always the same story: “I want to be bigger, stronger, and less fat.” We’ll discuss how the program works, how the gym operates, and what I expect of him. We’ll talk a bit about nutrition. His eyes will widen when I tell him how much food he needs to eat to build that new muscle he wants. I’ll do my best to set his expectations and get him excited about the possibilities for positive change.

Over the next hour, I’ll teach him how to perform the basic exercises we’ll be using in the program—the squat, bench press, overhead press, deadlift, and power clean. We’ll work up to a moderately challenging starting weight for each lift. I’ll show him how to fill out his training notebook and send him home with orders to buy some good weightlifting shoes and a big tub of protein powder.

The next day his legs will be sore. Every time he tries to get up off the toilet or walk down a flight of stairs, he’ll probably question his decision to hire me. But the soreness usually serves as a reminder that he’s been too sedentary for too long and this new endeavor is probably good for him.

If I can get him to show up consistently, he’ll notice that his body is changing. His jeans will get tighter around the thighs and butt, and perhaps a little looser in the waist. His T-shirts will start hugging his growing back and arms. His buddies will start to make comments about his physique. (The men always notice before the women).

With visible progress, he’ll become more disciplined with his training, recovery, and nutrition requirements. He’ll tighten up his diet. He’ll start going to bed a little earlier. He’ll miss fewer workouts. All of these habits will create a positive feedback loop in which better compliance produces better results, which improve compliance, and so on.

By the time he’s added a couple hundred pounds to his squat and deadlift, his posture will have dramatically improved. He’ll walk taller, with his chest up and shoulders back. This won’t be a conscious decision, but rather a predictable result of his stronger back muscles pulling him into proper alignment. He’ll start to look and feel like a powerful, more attractive man—perhaps for the first time ever—and there’s no telling how his new self-confidence will ripple out to other areas of his life.

Going back to that crowded bar in Silicon Beach: What I did know, watching Nate as he struggled to appear comfortable in his own skin, was that I could help him. If I could just get him into my gym and under a barbell, I could teach him how to build a body he was proud of—just as I had done with countless guys before him. Something inside (probably the whiskey) was compelling me to walk over and say something. It felt as if the culmination of all my experiences, successes, mistakes, and lessons I had learned over the last twenty years had been preparing me for this moment with this guy.

Naturally, I did what any rational person would do in that situation—nothing. I sobered up enough to remember that people usually aren’t receptive to random, slightly buzzed strangers barging into their group and pointing out that they’re fat and should probably start lifting weights. Instead, I bit my tongue, sipped my drink, and watched as Nate and his friends paid their tab and left the bar. But for weeks after, I couldn’t stop thinking about him.

That evening made me realize I was missing something. I wished I had a simple, practical, easily digestible instruction manual I could give to a guy like Nate and say, “Look, you don’t know me, but I know you. I used to be you. Here. This is everything you need. Read it. Do it. Ignore everything else. I promise it will change your life.”

I could have told him about Starting Strength and pointed him to the book, but I wanted something more accessible, shorter, and less academic. The impressive level of detail in Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training is often daunting to new lifters. I needed something Nate could read in a weekend that would get him fired up and ready to get started.

Moreover, the focus of Starting Strength is primarily on improving strength and performance, not physical appearance. Rip’s advice to young male trainees is to get as big and strong as possible and not concern themselves with accumulating body fat or the pursuit of visible abdominal muscles. And while I agree that a 500-pound deadlift is a lot more useful than a razor-sharp six-pack hidden under your T-shirt, many guys (including me) don’t just want to be strong; they want to look strong, lean, and healthy, too. And after years of listening to clients tell me they were pleased with their newfound strength but underwhelmed by their appearance (many felt they just got fat), I began testing and tweaking my own approach, which blended strength training, traditional bodybuilding, and sound nutrition strategies into a simple, effective system that delivered the results my clients were seeking.

So, while I hold that Starting Strength is the best book ever written on the topic of strength training, and I’m eternally grateful to Rip and the Starting Strength community for making me the coach I am today, I felt like I had something to add to the conversation that might resonate with a certain audience seeking a more (and I cringe to use this term) aesthetics-focused approach to fitness.

Radically Simple Strength is my humble attempt to cut through the noise, the conflicting advice, and the deceptive bullshit spewed out by the modern fitness industry and put forth a clear-cut answer to one important question: “What should the average guy do to get in awesome shape?”

The book provides a detailed, step-by-step plan for increasing strength, packing on lean muscle mass, and shedding unwanted body fat. It’s the training blueprint I wish I’d had when I stepped into the gym for the first time more than two decades ago. Every detail is accounted for and explained. If something is omitted, it’s intentional. Read this book, and you will know exactly what to do every time you step into the gym or the kitchen.

If you’re brand new to lifting, this book will streamline the process and save you loads of valuable time and unnecessary frustration. If you have some training experience, this book will free you from the decision-making fatigue of trying to solve the fitness puzzle on your own and put you on a solid path to making more progress than ever before.

I promise that if you follow the program and implement the strategies outlined in this book, it will transform you. You will look like a guy who lifts weights. People around you will notice and comment. And you will be able to stand in front of the mirror buck-naked and be proud of what you see—well, mostly (some things are beyond my control).

But there’s more. If you commit to the process, it will teach you important lessons about yourself and what you’re capable of. You will experience profound psychological changes that come from learning to do difficult things. You will become a tougher, more disciplined, more resilient dude, and you’ll develop a deep sense of personal pride, knowing that you achieved something others want but won’t put in the hard work required to get.

Selfishly, I hope this book gets passed around from one guy to the next until it eventually lands on Nate’s desk or in his inbox. I hope he reads it, gets inspired, gets in the best shape of his life, finds the love of his life, and lives happily ever after. And if you’re in a similar place, if you’re ready to stop making excuses, stop settling, and finally take charge of your health and fitness, I want those things for you, too.

A lot has changed since I started writing this book just before the COVID-19 pandemic turned the world upside down. One thing that became crystal clear was that the most devastating effects of the virus were closely associated with obesity. So, while my initial intent was to help average guys look better, build confidence, and improve their chances of finding quality romantic partners, etc., it appears that there’s now an even more compelling reason to get your ass in shape—it just might save your life.





CHAPTER 1





BROS VS. PROS





What should the average guy do to get in shape? It’s a simple question. Yet every day I sit across from men who have come to my gym looking for the answer. They all want the same thing—to be bigger, stronger, more muscular, and less fat—but they’re confused and frustrated by the process. Some want help getting started, while others have been at it for years with little to show for their time and effort.

With the origins of strength training dating back to antiquity, and the rise of bodybuilding beginning sometime around the late nineteenth century, learning how to build a strong, impressive, muscular physique is a problem you’d think we’d have solved by now. In many respects, we have. Advances in science and technology have uncovered the complex biological processes that explain how muscles work and, more importantly, what makes them grow (a.k.a. “hypertrophy,” the increase in the size of muscle cells in response to stimulation). Exercise physiologists continue to test theories and publish research that deepens our understanding of optimal training methodologies, nutritional protocols, and recovery strategies. And the general public has more access to this information than at any other point in history. Yet despite the abundance of information at our fingertips and the growing number of gyms, trainers, and online coaches offering their advice and services, we still have an epidemic of weak, doughy dudes and a multibillion-dollar fitness industry profiting off their desire to not be.

I have a lot of sympathy for the average guy trying to solve the fitness puzzle these days. When I first set foot in the gym over twenty years ago, the resources were limited. There was Arnold Schwarzenegger’s legendary behemoth, The New Encyclopedia of Modern Bodybuilding, a few books on strength training from prominent Russian coaches, some obscure online forums and message boards, a few nutrition e-books floating around, written by faceless, self-proclaimed experts, and a couple websites like BodyBuilding.com and T-Nation.com that pumped out training articles as vehicles for selling expensive supplements. But that was about it.

If you weren’t an athlete (I wasn’t) and didn’t have access to the collegiate strength and conditioning coaches (I didn’t), then you learned about training by watching the bigger guys in the gym, gleaning what you could from magazine articles and nascent websites, or some combination of the two. There was a lot of trial and error.

Today, however, with the rise of the internet and the spread of social media, the advice and options about how to get in decent shape are endless, and the decision-making process can be overwhelming. Unfortunately, much of the information being put forth comes from unqualified fitness bros, unscrupulous “influencers,” and silver-tongued snake oil salesmen leveraging the tools of these new media to attract your attention and sell you shit you don’t need.





EARNED EXPERTISE


Real expertise is rare and valuable. Listening to the advice of those with deep domain knowledge can save you time, reduce frustration, and streamline your path to success.

Mastery of a subject requires years of hard work and discipline. Experts have studied those who came before them, they’ve walked the path themselves, and they are able to demonstrate their knowledge with testable and measurable results.

Moreover, experts spend much of their careers actively seeking new information that challenges their ideas and contradicts their belief systems. They have changed their minds or been flat-out wrong so many times, their advice is calculated, loaded with caveats, and accompanied by a healthy dose of humility.

As a professional coach and gym owner, I get hired to help clients achieve a particular goal (increased strength, more muscle, less fat, etc.). If I don’t deliver on those results, I have to face my failures. My clients let me know by confronting me directly or by deciding not to pay me. Either way, I’m made aware of my shortcomings.

Failure from real-world experience is how expertise is earned. It teaches you important lessons that make you better. You have to own your mistakes, admit that you didn’t know what you thought you knew, realize that you weren’t as good as you thought you were, and have the strength of character to take your lumps and move forward with a different approach. Fail to make good on your promises for too long and you go out of business.

But in the vast, unregulated free-for-all that is the modern internet—where everyone has equal access to powerful tools of self-promotion and persuasion—experience (through repeated trial and error) is no longer a prerequisite for claiming expert status. Social media has eliminated many of the traditional gatekeepers, broken down barriers to entry, and shrunk the signal-to-noise ratio separating inexperienced bros from seasoned pros. If we’ve learned anything from the COVID-19 pandemic, it’s that the opinions of some dude with a popular YouTube channel can now carry the same weight as those of an infectious diseases specialist with a medical degree and decades of training and clinical practice under his belt.

As legitimate expertise continues to be devalued, ambitious amateurs, cunning coaches, and insidious influencers—armed with little more than a laptop, a smartphone, and some rudimentary editing chops—are leveraging the power of popular social media platforms to bolster their credibility, position themselves as authorities, and build lucrative businesses selling advice, training programs, supplements, fitness equipment, merchandise, and more. Existing entirely in an online bubble, with no need for in-person interactions, these self-appointed gurus and pseudo-experts are free to pump out endless streams of content bloviating about their untested theories and spreading their bullshit bro-science without ever experiencing the painfully enlightening realization that their methods don’t produce real-world results, and they may, in fact, have no fucking clue what they’re talking about.





TRACTION IN THE ATTENTION ECONOMY


Whether teaching rock climbing, tennis, drumming, or weightlifting, most seasoned experts and coaches advocate that when learning a new skill, trainees should spend most of their time mastering the fundamental elements of the practice. But suggesting people would be best served by sticking to the basics is rather boring advice. And in our new “Attention Economy,” where awareness and engagement are forms of currency that consumers exchange for content, boring things don’t get clicked, liked, shared, upvoted, re-tweeted, or recommended.

We know from studying competitive bodybuilders, for example—guys whose livelihoods depend on being as lean and muscular as possible—that eating several high-protein, high-carbohydrate, low-fat meals is a proven strategy for building an impressive physique. But no one wants to read about that. It’s old news. It’s not sexy, exciting, or novel, and advocating such an approach won’t get you much attention.

People want magic. The “one weird trick.” The secret hack that promises impossible results without any of the hard, monotonous work of shoveling dry chicken breasts down your throat and busting your ass in the gym. So instead of conventional advice that works, algorithms designed to prioritize that which is most polarizing and sensational bombard us with clickbait content about flashy fad diets, unproven pills and potions, and newfangled fitness routines with a bunch of “must-do” exercises you’ve never heard of.

The most successful fitness celebrities and online influencers are masters of this new online economy. They understand the value of attention and will often use any means necessary to garner it.

Take a casual scroll through your favorite social media platform and you’ll undoubtedly encounter a colorful cast of questionable characters utilizing any number of attention-grabbing tactics and tricks—from the daft and dubious, to the downright deceptive. Impossibly lean and muscular bodybuilders post Photoshopped images of themselves performing incredible feats of strength with Styrofoam weights to peddle expensive supplements they credit for their superhuman physiques—conveniently failing to mention their rather obvious use of anabolic steroids. Shirtless and shredded modern-day cavemen swear that a diet of organ meat and their proprietary blend of powdered zebra testicles is the ancestrally aligned recipe for optimal health. (Though one could safely assume that trenbolone, rather than tiger blood, is the real catalyst for their ripped abs and bulging biceps.) Functional-training coaches spew out confusing jargon, like “full-fascial integration,” “fortified fluidity,” “oscillating kinetic energy,” and “eccentric isometrics” (whatever the hell that means) to promote e-books filled with overly complicated solutions to imaginary problems. And popular bio-hackers (definitely “on the juice” and putting god knows what else into their “anti-aging” cocktails) champion tanning their genitals on the beach (a.k.a. “perineum sunning”) as a way to increase testosterone levels and, of course, drive more traffic to their pricey online coaching certification courses.

This is the current fitness environment. Simple, rational, time-tested advice advocated by humble experts gets overlooked or buried by the more flashy, extreme, attention-grabbing bullshit of greedy, disingenuous, ultracrepidarian bros and hucksters vying for your likes, clicks, and cash in the Attention Economy. And you, the average dude looking for answers, are left frustrated, confused, and exhausted. But I have good news: You can ignore all of it.





AN ANTIDOTE TO THE FITNESS-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX


The truth is that getting in awesome shape is not complicated. There are some basic principles you need to understand, but the process of building muscle and shedding body fat is well established and incredibly straightforward. The remainder of this book will illuminate a clear path toward transforming your physique and help you develop a healthy, sustainable relationship with fitness and nutrition while avoiding the seductive shortcuts and half-witted hacks that fail to produce the results they promise or put your health at risk.

But fair warning—the strategies outlined in the coming chapters, while simple, are not easy. They require hard work, consistent application, and discipline. The best training program in the world won’t produce results if you don’t show up and do it. I’ve done my best to streamline the process and encourage compliance, but making any meaningful change in life usually demands you endure some degree of discomfort. Nonetheless, I’m confident you can do it, and you’ll be glad you did. With that, you’re ready to start building a stronger, leaner, healthier, more badass version of yourself, and it begins with embracing one important idea.





CHAPTER 2





RADICAL SIMPLICITY





With the abundance of conflicting advice and misinformation, figuring out what to do in the gym can feel like an overwhelming endeavor. But by embracing the principle of “radical simplicity,” which demands that you focus on only those things that give you the biggest return on your investment of time and energy while ruthlessly eliminating everything else, you can keep the tyrannical forces of confusion and complexity at bay.

Radical simplicity is a lens through which you can evaluate every aspect of your training and nutrition approach and make decisions about what types of exercises to do, what equipment to use, how to structure your workouts, and what foods to eat. Moreover, radical simplicity will help you determine which ideas, strategies, and tactics to ignore, reducing your anxiety and decision-making fatigue, and allowing you to focus on productive action. When it comes to putting together a solid plan to get in awesome shape, it’s either radically simple, or it’s out.





RADICAL SIMPLICITY IN PRACTICE


Let’s briefly look at how this powerful principle can be used to shape each element of the program detailed in the coming chapters.



Exercise selection

You don’t need more than a handful of exercises to build a bigger, stronger body. In fact, to get started, you need to learn only four basic lifts—squat, bench press, overhead press, and deadlift (detailed video tutorials for each exercise can be found at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources). These compound exercises use multiple muscle groups and joints in unison. When combined, they work the entire body and create a ton of productive, muscle-building stress in a short amount of time.

As a radically simple minimalist, you’ll focus on improving just these basic lifts to build a strong foundation of size and strength. Later in the program, you’ll add a few supplemental exercises to help sustain your progress on the primary movements and enhance the overall look of your physique.

Spending the majority of your time on the most bang-for-your-buck exercises, like squats and deadlifts, will do far more for your strength and body composition than wasting hours in the gym with a bunch of isolation (single-joint) exercises that involve far less muscle mass.



Equipment

As with your intentionally limited exercise selection, you don’t need much equipment in your training toolbox either. The bulk of this regimen requires little more than a humble barbell. With just a seven-foot piece of cold-rolled steel, a squat rack, a bench, and some weights, you can accomplish everything outlined in the program.

In addition to providing an efficient way to work large sections of muscle mass at one time, barbells have some other distinct advantages over the popular equipment you’ll find in a typical gym. Unlike exercise machines—with fixed levers, cams, and pulleys that force you into one-size-fits-all movement patterns—barbells adjust to your anthropometry (your body’s unique dimensions) and force you to do all the work.

Moreover, barbells are also easy to load in very small increments—a practice called “micro-loading,” which, as you’ll see, is critical to sustaining progress. If you want the ability to make tiny increases in weight with dumbbells or kettlebells, you’ll need a hell of a lot of them. But with a pair of 1-to-2-pound plates loaded on the end of a barbell, you can make as many small jumps as you need.

Finally, compared to treadmills and machines, barbells are inexpensive, rarely break, and don’t take up much room. You can set up a beautiful home gym in a garage or spare room for a modest investment (see the appendix to learn how to build an awesome home gym). With all of these advantages, barbells are the perfect tool for your radically simple training program.



Workouts

Legendary punk band The Ramones were famously fast. Their songs were around two minutes long, and their concerts rarely lasted more than twenty. As drummer Tommy Ramone is often quoted as saying, “We play short songs and short sets for people who don’t have a lot of spare time” and “Eliminate the unnecessary and focus on the substance.” But the brilliance of the band’s brevity was that they always left their audience wanting more. They came at you hard and fast, with intensity and focused energy, and then got out.

Since you don’t need a lot of exercises or equipment, you certainly don’t need to be in the gym six days a week for three hours at a time to get in great shape. With radically simple workouts, you can train effectively in just two or three hour-long sessions per week.

Short workouts focus your attention and force you to make each set and each rep count. Unlike long, grueling sessions that leave you tired, beat up, and dreading your next workout, the abbreviated schedule in this program will have you chomping at the bit to get back under the barbell each week.

Let the silly bros live in the gym, snapping selfies and admiring themselves in the mirror as they bang out endless sets and reps of every exercise imaginable. Like a fast and furious set from Joey, Johnny, Dee Dee, and Tommy, your radically simple workouts will accomplish more in less time while leaving you fresh, excited, and eager for more.



Programming

Creating and selling training program templates is a lucrative business for many online fitness coaches. They’ll pick a popular goal (e.g., fat loss, muscle gain, bigger arms, six-pack abs, etc.), arrange some exercises in a neat little spreadsheet, give it a silly name like “Fat-Loss Inferno” or “Beast-Mode Biceps,” and launch an aggressive social media marketing campaign positioning the program as the ultimate solution to achieving all your fitness dreams. When sales inevitably taper off, these coaches simply rearrange the exercises, sets, and reps and, voilà, present a new “must-have” program. The more templates they have available, the more revenue they generate, and the more confusing it is to figure out which plan or program is right for you.

New lifters often get seduced by new training programs—jumping from one template to the next in hopes of finding the perfect protocol. But like the menu at Taco Bell, most of these programs are just different arrangements of the same ingredients.

In reality, your program doesn’t matter much. As long as it’s based on sound principles, almost anything will work for a trainee who is dedicated. You’re far better off (physically and financially) taking a simple program and milking it for as long as you can than randomly hopping from one template to the next. Consistency always trumps novelty.

The radically simple program in this book consists of just six templates that evolve as you move through the novice, intermediate, and advanced stages of your training. Each template logically and systematically builds upon the previous one.

The first three novice programs are designed to familiarize you with the core exercises and start building a solid foundation of strength and size. The intermediate and advanced templates add layers of variety and flexibility to shape your physique and help you train productively in both the muscle-building and fat-shedding stages of the program.

The reason this program works isn’t because the templates are groundbreaking configurations of exercises that only my brilliant mind could create. I “borrowed” everything in this book from great athletes and coaches who came before me and who undoubtedly took inspiration from their predecessors. Rather, the program is effective because it’s a comprehensive, flexible system that can be utilized throughout your entire training career. There is no need to waste any more time or money on overhyped, overpriced routines that overpromise and under-deliver. Everything you need to know about building your best body is here. Work your way from one template to the next, stick to the plan, ignore everything else, and you will succeed.



Nutrition

Any fitness pro worth their salt will tell you that a proper diet is just as important as your training program. In fact, when it comes to getting lean, nutrition is the most important factor. It’s also the thing most guys screw up. Fortunately, the principle of radical simplicity can be applied just as effectively to your nutrition plan and will make dialing in your diet a painless process.

You’ll build your entire nutrition strategy around just a few basic meals that require minimal ingredients, equipment, time, and effort to prepare, and you’ll augment these meals with a couple of inexpensive, well-researched nutritional supplements. With this approach, you’ll need to be in the kitchen for only ten to twenty minutes at a time to give your body everything it needs to pack on muscle or shed body fat.

This radically simple diet means you can put the calculator away, delete your calorie-tracking apps, and forget about useless supplements or complicated recipes. You won’t need that stuff here.





FREEDOM THROUGH SIMPLICITY


There is tremendous freedom in embracing this militant minimalism. Freedom to stop reading, researching, over-analyzing, testing, tweaking, and jumping from one training program to the next. Freedom to pick a solid plan and start making real progress instead of pondering all possible routes. Freedom from the mental fatigue and anxiety that come with trying to continually re-imagine your approach. Freedom to spend less time thinking and more time doing.

The reason most people fail to reach their fitness goals isn’t because they did the wrong thing; it’s because they did nothing. Paralysis by analysis is real, but by embracing radical simplicity, you can intentionally and aggressively limit your inputs, shut off the never-ending stream of seductive but distracting advice, and dedicate your time and attention to implementing the proven strategies that produce the results you want.





CHAPTER 3





AGENTS OF CHANGE: STRESS AND RECOVERY





To build an awesome body, you need to do three things: 1) get stronger 2) get bigger, and 3) get leaner. The radically simple training and nutrition program you’ll be using to accomplish these goals is split into two phases. The first phase is focused on increasing strength and packing on lean muscle mass. The second phase shifts the focus to shedding body fat to reveal a ripped physique. Then the process repeats.

But before you dive into the nuts and bolts of the program, you need to understand how muscle is built, how fat is lost, and which important training and nutrition variables you can manipulate to accomplish each goal.





STRESS


Getting stronger and getting bigger are inextricably linked. If you want your muscles to grow larger, they must get stronger and vice versa.

Strength (as defined in Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training) is the ability to produce force against an external resistance. Picking up a pencil, a can of paint, or a loaded barbell requires the production of enough force to move each object. A guy who can deadlift 500 pounds is able to produce more force than a guy who can deadlift only 200 pounds, so the first guy is, by definition, the stronger man.

The force I’m talking about is produced by the coordinated contraction of your muscles moving your bones. It’s a pretty cool and complex system, but for now, what you need to know is that bigger muscles can produce more force than smaller muscles. So bigger muscles not only look cool, but are also more functional.

To make your muscles grow (a.k.a. “hypertrophy”), you need to do two things: 1) apply increasing amounts of stress by requiring the muscles to produce increasing amounts of force, and 2) provide sufficient recovery from said stress in the form of adequate rest and proper nutrition. The combination of stress plus adequate recovery leads to adaptation and growth. Put another way, to get sufficiently jacked, you need to lift heavy shit, eat lots of food, and sleep.

The process of steadily increasing the stress you subject your muscles to during your workouts is known as “progressive overload,” which is a fancy way of saying that each training session is a little bit harder than the last one. You can increase difficulty by adding more total work in the form of additional sets and reps (a.k.a. “volume”), by increasing the amount of weight you’re trying to lift (a.k.a. “intensity”), or a combination of both.

The purpose of going to the gym and lifting weights is to apply quantitative stress to your body. When you do a set of squats, for example, you’re stressing the musculoskeletal system by demanding it produce enough force to lift a given amount of weight a certain number of times. To do this, your body will recruit enough motor units (the motor neurons and all the individual muscle fibers they innervate) to move the load. Those fibers are made up of proteins that contract (by literally crawling across each other) to produce force.

As these muscle fibers are repeatedly recruited, stressed, and fatigued, receptors in the cells sense the force being applied and respond by converting the mechanical stimuli into biochemical signals. This process, called “mechanotransduction,” kicks off a series of metabolic processes that lead to the synthesis of new contractile proteins. The addition of more proteins increases the size of the muscle and its ability to produce more total force (i.e., you get bigger and stronger).

The important thing to know is that the body will recruit only the motor units it needs to move a given weight a certain number of times, and no more. Picking up the pencil, for example, requires relatively few motor units to be recruited. As the weight increases, however, more motor units are called into action.

Similarly, as you progress through a set of an exercise, the motor units that were recruited for the first few reps will begin to fatigue. When this occurs, the body will activate even more (larger) motor units, allowing you to complete more reps. Only when a muscle fiber is recruited and exposed to a high degree of stress—stretching and contracting under load—will it respond by increasing in size (assuming you’ve provided enough resources from your diet).

Therefore, if your goal is to build as much muscle mass as possible, you need to lift weights that are heavy enough to require the recruitment of as many motor units as possible and then subject them to a high degree of intramuscular force by performing enough reps to thoroughly fatigue the muscle fibers. Training to absolute failure isn’t necessary, but to signal the mechanism for growth and initiate muscle protein synthesis, you need to get pretty damn close.

There is a subset of people in the strength training community who have planted their flags firmly in the “more volume is better” camp and believe that performing set upon set with moderately heavy weights is the best way to build muscle and strength. For example, I’ve seen popular training programs that call for six sets of five reps with a weight you could actually lift seven to nine times. The problem with this type of high-volume approach is that moderate weights aren’t heavy enough to recruit high-threshold motor units unless each set is taken close to failure. If you’re stopping a set with several reps left in the tank, you aren’t providing sufficient stress to cause any meaningful muscle hypertrophy.

High-volume training is worthless without a high degree of effort. If it worked, road cyclists and marathon runners would have huge legs, and brushing your teeth would give you thick, meaty forearms. But they don’t and it won’t because the intensity and effort required for those activities is not high enough to recruit and stress an adequate number of motor units.

Becoming a volume-warrior and striving to accumulate more stress through ever-increasing sets and reps (that don’t approach failure) won’t make you bigger or stronger. Moreover, it’s exhausting, unnecessary, and counterproductive, especially if you want to get in and out of the gym in a reasonable amount of time.

Therefore, the goal of this radically simple training program is for you to eventually be able to do more with less. As a novice lifter, you haven’t developed the neuromuscular efficiency to lift heavy weights very effectively. You have some muscle mass; you just don’t know how to use it very well. Over time, as you gain experience and become more technically proficient, you’ll learn to recruit more total motor units in a coordinated fashion. There will be less slop and less wasted effort. The movements will be tighter and smoother, so you’ll be able to handle bigger weights and generate more stress with every rep. Each set will take the same amount of time to complete, but with practice, it will become significantly more productive. This efficiency is a critical component of keeping your workouts short and sweet.

Yes, volume is important. Performing a single squat won’t provide enough total stress to make you grow much—there is a minimum dose of volume required. But working with weights that are heavy enough to recruit and stress as much muscle mass as possible is the key to building and maintaining strength and size. So, for most of this program, you’re going to focus on driving up the intensity (or weight) and making each rep as productive as possible, adding more volume only when absolutely necessary.



The practical application of stress

At your first training session, you’ll figure out your starting weights for each exercise in the program. This will be a moderately heavy set of five reps done with perfect form. Assuming you’re able to complete all the sets and reps in your first workout, you will increase the weight a little bit in each successive training session. So, for example, if you squatted 135 pounds for five reps (135 × 5) on day one, and it was challenging, but you experienced no breakdown in your technique, then at the next workout, you might add 10 pounds and try to squat 145 × 5. If you’re able to do that, you’ll try 155 × 5 next time, and so on.

Steadily increasing the weight on the bar every workout is called a “linear progression.” (Creative title, right?) How much you’ll increase the weight each workout will depend on the exercise and how long you’ve been training. The stronger you get, the smaller the increases will be. I’ll discuss specific increments for each lift later, but for now, just understand that your mission at the outset of this program is to put a little more weight on the bar every time you train for as long as you can.

The more weight you lift, the more force your body is required to produce and the more stress you generate. That stress sends powerful signals prompting the body to respond by building new tissues like tendons, ligaments, bone, and most importantly, muscle mass. But enabling those processes to take place assumes that you get the other half of the equation right: the recovery.





RECOVERY (THE HARD PART)


As my coach, Mark Rippetoe, famously said, “You don’t get big and strong from lifting weights; you get big and strong by recovering from lifting weights.” The workout is just a means to apply stress. The real muscle magic happens after the workout.

“Recovery” means sleeping, resting, and eating, and it’s the thing most guys mess up. Going to the gym, throwing weight around, and pumping up your muscles is the fun part. Once you catch the “iron bug” and start to see your body change in a positive way, you’ll look forward to your workouts. It won’t take much convincing to get you into the gym. The recovery stuff is the difficult part, but it’s just as important.

Getting enough sleep is boring. Grocery shopping is boring. Cooking is boring. Not eating donuts is boring. But busting your ass in the gym and then failing to recover properly is a massive waste of your time. You’re training hard, grinding out your reps, and then not giving your body what it needs to reap the rewards of your effort and lay down new muscle tissue. It’s like buying a nice car and then refusing to fill up the gas tank. Sure, you’ll get to drive it around for a bit, but eventually it won’t run. The best training program in the world won’t do jack shit if your recovery is insufficient. Conversely, almost any program will produce results if you’re eating and sleeping enough to recover and grow.



Sleep

Recommendations for sleep are easy, so we’ll cover that first. Ready? Get as much sleep as you possibly can. If you can sleep twelve hours every night, do it. You grow in your sleep. You squirt all kinds of helpful hormones in your sleep. You even consolidate memories and assimilate new motor patterns in your sleep. You want as much sleep as you can get. This isn’t always easy because of the realities of life, but you need to shoot for at least seven to eight hours a night. Get blackout curtains. Wear earplugs. Stop drinking coffee and alcohol late at night. Keep a boring book next to your bed. Do whatever you can to maximize your sleep.

To see how important sleep is, do a simple experiment. During the week, when you get up early, pay attention to how you feel throughout the day. Notice your ability to focus, your mood, how well you do on creative tasks, and how quickly you get irritated or frustrated. Then, compare that to how you feel on a day when you’ve gotten lots of sleep, on a weekend perhaps. If you’re like most people, you’ll find you have a better sense of overall well-being; you’re happier, less irritable, and more productive.

Sleep affects everything, including your appetite, mood, energy levels, motivation, willpower, and ability to cope with stress and recover from your workouts. Make it a priority.





Rest

Rest includes sleep, but it extends to the hours that you’re awake as well. Resting means not doing things that add stress and interfere with the natural recovery process that takes place after your training sessions. The rest days between workouts are just as important as the workouts themselves. Your body needs a period without additional stress to repair itself. If you squat heavy on Monday and then decide to start training for an ultramarathon on Tuesday, you are not resting, and Thursday’s workout is probably going to suck.

I’m not suggesting that you sit on your couch all day and move as little as possible. Enjoy your life. Go for an easy hike; surf; ride your bike. But be smart about the intensity and duration of your extracurricular activities because as you get stronger and can generate more stress with each workout, your recovery needs will increase as well.

This is what can happen: A few months ago, there was a young accountant in my gym who was making some impressive progress on his squats. He had gone from 95 to 320 pounds without missing a single rep and with no sign of slowing down. It was inspiring to watch. Then one day he took the barbell out of the rack, did one slow, grindy rep down, and didn’t come back up.

It perplexed me. Two days earlier, he crushed a set of five reps with a weight that was just a few pounds lighter. If he was nearing his limit, I would have expected him to miss his very last rep but definitely not his first. When I asked what was going on, he told me that his car wouldn’t start that morning, and he had to ride his bike six miles to work.

Now, a relatively flat, twelve-mile round-trip bike ride isn’t normally a big deal, but his legs weren’t prepared for the additional work. He had adapted to the stress of squatting heavy three times a week, but he had not adapted to squatting and riding his bike. The added stress completely derailed his training, and it took weeks to get him back on track.

Remember, should you decide to do this program, you are making a commitment to the specific goal of getting bigger and stronger. If your extracurricular activities get in the way of your recovery, then you should avoid them. If you’ve decided to spend the next few months prioritizing the goal of increasing strength and size, then train hard on your training days and rest hard on your resting days.



Food

Food is the gas you put in the tank that allows your body to train and grow. When you’re trying to build muscle and increase your strength, you must consume enough calories to not only provide energy to fuel your workouts, but also give your body the resources it requires to repair the damage and build new muscle mass when the workout is over. Conversely, when your goal is to lose the excess body fat that’s covering up your hard-earned muscle mass, you need to strategically reduce the amount of food you’re consuming so your body is forced to burn off fat for energy.

We’ll do a deep dive into nutrition in Chapters 10–12. For now, understand that if you bust your ass in the gym, but fail to eat the right foods in the right amounts for your goal, you’ll never realize your body’s potential or build a truly impressive physique.





INTENTIONAL EFFORT


As I’ve mentioned, consistently applying stress to your body and managing your recovery are critical elements of effective training. Going to the gym and randomly playing around with the weights is not enough. Trying to “eat more protein” or “cut carbs” never works in the long term. There must be a logical, well-thought-out strategy and system in place to keep you accountable and force the adaptations of muscle growth and fat loss.

Fortunately, the process of manipulating the variables of stress, rest, and food to reach your strength and body-composition goals is built right into the radically simple training and nutrition plan. In the next chapter, I’ll get specific about those goals.





CHAPTER 4





REALISTIC GOALS AND EXPECTATIONS





Usually when new clients come to my gym, they’re chasing something. They have an image in their minds of a Hollywood action hero, a bodybuilder, or a popular social media personality with shredded six-pack abs, big vascular arms, prominent pectorals, etc.

Having a specific person you look to for inspiration can be a source of motivation, but beware of whom you’re comparing yourself to and modeling your training after. For one thing, über-jacked bodybuilders and fitness models often live extreme lifestyles. And extremes, by definition, lack the kind of balance that makes them sustainable.

Moreover, anyone making a living on their freakishly ripped, muscular physique is almost certainly an outlier. Genetic advantages required for a successful career in bodybuilding, like thin skin and long muscle bellies, are determined by mom and dad. If you’re an average guy, you could do Arnold Schwarzenegger’s exact workout routine, eat his diet, and take his drugs, and you’d never look like him. But that doesn’t mean you can’t look a hell of a lot better than you do now.

You can still build a badass body without perfect genes, extreme routines, and steroids, but it’s important that you set realistic expectations and make sure your goals are achievable without sacrificing your social life or turning to drugs. Aiming at a target you have zero chance of hitting is a surefire way to kill your motivation, frustrate the hell out of you, and potentially tempt you to put your own health and safety at risk.

Good goals are attainable and specific. Are you trying to get stronger? How much stronger? Do you want to be leaner? Exactly what body fat percentage are you shooting for? I can’t stress this enough—without a concrete target to aim at, you’re sure to miss.

The good news is that for each phase of this program, I’m going to take all the guesswork out of goal setting and lay out some realistic targets for strength and body composition that are well within the reach of the typical drug-free dude with average genetics.

Before I get into specifics, allow me to pass along a pithy elevator pitch that perfectly summarizes the overarching aims of this book—one that I shamelessly stole from a former client. When I pressed him about his goals during our initial consultation, he said bluntly, “Look, I’m not trying to be a powerlifter or anything. I just want to be a little bigger, a little stronger, not fat, and not hurt.” I’d heard similar sentiments from hundreds of other clients, but the way he worded it was so clear and succinct that it stuck with me. Getting a little bigger, a little stronger, not fat, and not hurt is a totally realistic and attainable goal that every guy should strive for.

The point is, I couldn’t care less about making you the most decorated strength athlete of all time or getting you the physique of a competitive bodybuilder about to step on stage in a tiny purple thong. If you want that, put this book down and find another coach (and perhaps a morally flexible pharmacist).

The goal of this program is to help you build an awesome body, which I define as “above-average strength and muscle mass and below-average body fat.” If you walk into a bar, office, or coffee shop, you should be bigger, stronger, and leaner than most of the people in it. It should be obvious to everyone around you that you’re a dude in great shape. You should be able to confidently hold your own in the weight room and look in the mirror at home and like what you see. Not the biggest. Not the strongest. Not the leanest. Above average is good enough, achievable, sustainable, and realistic.





REALISTIC STRENGTH GOALS


Okay, let’s get specific. The first phase of the program is all about increasing your strength and size. As I just discussed, getting bigger and more muscular, by definition, means you need to get stronger. The more weight you lift, the bigger your muscles will get.

Therefore, when it comes to strength, the weight you load on the barbell is the single best proxy you have for gauging progress. If you start out squatting 95 pounds, and six months later you can squat 350, you got stronger and bigger. Period.

While it’s fun to compare numbers and see how you stack up in the gym, the weight doesn’t really matter. The important thing is that whatever you’re lifting is a little heavier than what you lifted the last time. But you do need a target to aim for, so I’ll lay out some realistic strength goals that the average, drug-free dude should strive for. Take a look at the following table.



Tiers of strength goals (each plate number in Tier 1 represents a pair of plates).



Strength goals are traditionally measured in terms of a one-rep max (1RM), which is the most weight you can lift for a single repetition. You can find your 1RM by periodically testing your max for each lift or by using a formula to estimate a 1RM based on what you’ve done at different rep ranges in your training. Instructions for both methods are detailed in the appendix.

To keep things radically simple, you’ll begin by setting your sights on “plate goals” for each of the four primary exercises used in the program (squat, bench, press, and deadlift). A standard Olympic weight plate is 45 pounds (20 kg for anyone outside the US), as is a standard barbell. Using plate increments as benchmarks for progress, the average guy should strive to hit the Tier 1 goals within six to twelve months of consistent training. As you look at the table above, remember that you have to load an equal number of plates on both sides of the barbell. A “1-plate” press, therefore, means you’re actually lifting two 45-pound plates—one on each side of the bar.

You’re not going to break any powerlifting records with those numbers, but the Tier 1 goals should all be within your reach, and they represent above-average strength compared to most of the general population.

Obviously, hitting these targets will be easier for some than for others. Everyone is unique, and genetic differences are a factor. If you’re starting the program at 6'3", 240 pounds, you might check off some of the Tier 1 goals in a matter of weeks. If you’re 5'9", 145 pounds, you’ve got some work cut out for you, but it can be done.

Once you tackle the initial Tier 1 goals, you’ll switch to goals that are either in hundred-pound increments (“hundo” goals) or based on a multiple of your bodyweight (“BW” goals). Start with whichever one you’re closer to, and then, when you achieve it, switch to the other. If a 215-pound lifter worked his squat up to 405 pounds, for example, he’d have exceeded the Tier 2 “hundo” goal of 400 pounds and would then move on to the bodyweight-multiple goal of 430 pounds (215 × 2).

Tier 1 goals should be straightforward and attainable. Tier 2 goals, on the other hand, will take more discipline and commitment to reach, but they are within the grasp of most male, drug-free trainees who are dedicated. Tackle the Tier 2 goals and you can consider yourself to have achieved above-average strength, even when compared to other dedicated bros in the gym.

Finally, trainees who check off the Tier 2 goals and want more of a challenge should set their sights on the Tier 3 goals. Understand, however, that for most of you, hitting some of these numbers is not likely in the cards. It takes an especially gifted lifter to press 300 pounds over his head. This is where those pesky genetics really come into play. Tier 3 goals are included simply for completeness on the off chance that some mutant happens to pick up this book.

For the rest of you, Tier 1 and 2 goals are realistic, laudable, totally achievable targets. Remember, the numbers aren’t as important as choosing a specific target and making consistent progress towards it. As long as your weights are climbing up steadily, be proud of your accomplishments and know that you’re well on your way to becoming a bigger, stronger dude.





REALISTIC BODY-COMPOSITION GOALS


Improving your physical strength is just one part of the process. The other reason to bust your ass in the gym and dial in your diet is to improve your body composition. Sure, it’s cool to be the guy throwing big weights around, but you’re probably more interested in looking good naked.

Body composition has two important components: lean body mass (LBM) and fat. Fat is, well, fat, and lean body mass is everything else, like muscles, bones, tendons, ligaments, organs, and water. For the purposes of this discussion, you need to be concerned with 1) how much muscle you have and 2) how much fat you don’t have.



Building muscle

A typical novice lifter can gain about 2 pounds of lean tissue per month. To do that, however, he’ll need to gain about 3 to 4 pounds of total bodyweight because he won’t add only lean mass—other stuff comes with it, like fat, water, and glycogen. As a general recommendation, to add muscle without getting unnecessarily fat, the average new trainee should plan to gain 0.5 to 1 pound of bodyweight per week for a total of 2 to 4 pounds of total weight gain each month during the first phase of the program. Assuming he trains hard and eats appropriately, of those 2 to 4 pounds, about 50% to 70% should be new muscle tissue.

Your goal is to gain as much muscle mass as possible without getting fat. I repeat—Don’t. Get. Fat. I have lost too many clients over the years who took the whole “bulking” process way too far. One guy confessed to eating eight slices of pizza before every workout because I said he needed to eat to grow. Sure, he got strong, but he also got himself a big gut, blamed me, and eventually quit the gym. Don’t be that guy. Yes, you need to eat enough food to support your training and build new muscle, but there is a limit beyond which more weight gain just means more body fat. Small, slow, steady increases in bodyweight are the key to minimizing fat accumulation during the gaining phases of training.

With every six to twelve months of consistent training, the rate at which you can add lean muscle mass will reduce by about half, and the closer you get to your genetic ceiling, the more things slow down. This is why, after a few years of training, many guys turn to drugs in a desperate attempt to overcome their genetic limitations and keep packing on more muscle.

To set some realistic expectations, in the first year or so on this program, an average novice lifter might add 20–25 pounds of lean muscle mass, which will result in 30–40 pounds of total weight gain (this will vary greatly depending on his body composition at the start of the program). The next year, he might add 10 pounds of lean mass, then 5 pounds, and so on. After about five years of dedicated training, the amount of new muscle mass added will be negligible. In a perfect scenario, over the course of an entire training career, the average, drug-free dude might add 40–50 pounds of muscle to his frame, whereas a professional bodybuilder using a buttload of anabolic steroids might add double that. Nonetheless, 40–50 pounds of additional muscle is pretty fucking badass, realistic, and definitely “above average.”



Losing fat

The other part of body composition is fat, so you need to understand what constitutes below-average body fat and what are realistic targets for leanness. According to the American Council for Exercise, average body fat for a male is 18%–24%. Fat is what’s covering up all that sweet muscle you’re going to pack on in the first phase of the program. So if you want to unveil a ripped physique, you’re going to have to strip off the fat, which means you’re going to have to get well below the average.

Let me put things in perspective. When you imagine a chiseled bodybuilder or shredded fitness influencer with razor-sharp six-pack abs, you’re looking at a guy who has 6%–8% body fat, sometimes even lower if he’s competing. A bodybuilder in contest shape is actually the weakest he’s been in his entire training cycle. He’s so dehydrated and depleted when he steps on stage, he’s on the verge of passing out.

While it might seem impressive, having extremely low body fat isn’t ideal for general athletic performance or particularly sustainable, and trying to stay below 6%–8% will make you hate your life. You’ll have very little energy, your training will suck, you’ll be hungry all the time, and your hormone levels will crash along with your libido. To ensure that you look good and feel good, you need a more realistic target for body composition.

During the first phase of the program, when your priority is adding muscle mass, you want to keep your body fat percentage below 20% and ideally closer to 15%. In the second phase, when the focus shifts to shedding fat, your goal is to get down to 10%. Ten percent body fat is very doable and sustainable—it’s also where your abs typically show up. Getting below 10% is akin to the Tier 3 strength goals—damn impressive, but probably out of reach for most dudes with average genetics.

As with the strength goals, the difficulty of reaching and maintaining this level of leanness will vary depending on your starting point and genetics. Some of you lucky fucks will begin the program fairly lean, while others will start the process a bit fluffier.

If your body fat is 35% right now, you gotta own that. I’m not trying to be insensitive or fat-shame anyone; it’s just reality. Spending years living a shitty lifestyle of overeating and under-exercising doesn’t lend itself to a nice-looking body. As I often tell my clients, “You can lie to yourself about your diet, but you can’t lie to me. If you’re wearing it, you ate it.” But no matter where you’re starting this process, if you stick to the program, you will be able to steadily reduce your body fat and eventually reveal a physique you’re proud to show off.

For the average guy, hovering between 10% and 15% body fat is a good, realistic target. At the lower end, you’ll see some nice definition in all the muscle you worked hard to build, and at the higher end, you’ll maintain a healthy, athletic-looking physique while having enough energy to make good progress in the gym and chase down the strength goals outlined earlier.



Understanding the order: Build first, then cut

Whether you’re trying to build muscle or lose body fat, your training program (what you do in the gym) will be very similar because while you need to lift heavy weights to build muscle, you also need to lift heavy weights to keep muscle as you strip off the fat. It’s primarily your diet that determines your body composition, and your nutritional requirements will change along with the different phases of your training and their respective goals. More calories are needed to add mass. Fewer calories are needed to lose fat.

The order of how you approach these two goals matters. You can get big and strong, and then get lean, but if you try to do both at the same time, you won’t do either. I see this all the time with young trainees. They want to lift big weights and impress their buddies in the gym, but they also want to have defined abs at the beach. If you don’t spend some time building your muscle mass first, however, there won’t be anything to show off when you strip away the body fat.



Muscle math

To illustrate why trying to lose weight first is usually a bad idea, I need to do some math for you. Bear with me. Take the example of a 160-pound male starting out at 18% body fat. To see his abs, he’d need to get his body fat down to about 10% and wind up weighing about 145 pounds (I’ll show you how to calculate your target body weight in Chapter 12). That’s basically a medium-sized woman. At that size, no one would care that this dude had a ripped six-pack under his shirt—he’d just look small and unimpressive.

A better approach for a guy like this would be to spend a couple months adding as much muscle mass to his frame as possible while minimizing fat accumulation, and then start cutting the body fat to uncover his lean, muscular physique.

Imagine that during the first four to six months of the program, the same hypothetical 160-pound lifter intentionally drove his bodyweight up 20 pounds to 180 (figure 1 pound a week for five months). Since he’s a beginner, with proper diet and training, it would be safe to estimate that about 60% (12 pounds) of that new bodyweight would be lean mass and 40% (8 pounds) would be fat (in reality, it could be higher or lower). That means that the “cost” of gaining 20 pounds of bodyweight would be a 2% increase in body fat. Instead of being 160 pounds at 18%, he’s now 180 pounds at 20%. Not bad, especially considering he’s gotten much stronger.

After adding 20 pounds of bodyweight, this lifter could then switch to the fat-loss phase of the program and begin the process of leaning out while trying to maintain his new muscle mass. To get down to 10% body fat, he would need to lose 20 pounds of fat, which he could accomplish in about five months (figuring 1 pound of fat loss per week) if he stuck to his nutrition and training program.

In the end, he would be back to where he started at a bodyweight of 160 pounds, but now, at 10% body fat, he’d be carrying 13 more pounds of lean muscle mass and 13 fewer pounds of fat on his frame than before. That is a very different-looking 160-pound dude.

Now, if he ran the program again, adding another 20 pounds of bodyweight over five months (12 pounds of muscle and 8 pounds of fat), and once again allowing his body fat to increase slightly, he’d end his second gaining phase weighing 180 pounds at about 15% body fat while most likely checking off a few more strength goals in the gym. He could then switch to another fat-loss phase, but this time he’d have to lose only about 10 pounds to get back to a lean 10% body fat. Losing 1 pound per week, this lifter would be 170 pounds at 10% body fat in only two and a half months. If you’re confused by these calculations, here’s a visual breakdown of each phase:



Example of weight-gain, muscle-gain, and fat-loss cycles.



As you can see, at the end of two cycles through the program (about eighteen months), this hypothetical lifter would weigh 10 pounds more than when he started, but he’d have an additional 22 pounds of lean muscle mass and 12 pounds less fat. He’d be bigger, stronger, and ripped. From there, he could simply repeat the process, gaining strength and size, and then cutting the fat.

Keep in mind the scenario outlined above is for illustrative purposes only. The timelines and ratios of muscle gain to fat loss will be much fuzzier in reality. This example also assumes that no muscle will be lost during cutting phases, which is possible but unlikely. So look at the example as a tool for understanding the general concept and not a guarantee of any particular result.



Recomposition

I’m willing to bet that some of you are hoping you’re the exception to the rule—that you can get big and lean simultaneously. It’s common for people to want things they can’t have, but understand that it is almost impossible to gain muscle mass and lose body fat at the same time (a.k.a. “recompose”), except in a few very specific scenarios:

You’re brand new to lifting.

You’re already carrying a lot of body fat.

You’re taking anabolic steroids.



Many of you will fall into the first or second category, some of you will fall into both, and a small subset of older lifters on hormone replacement therapy may fall into the third category. In all three cases, though, you’re in a short-lived, magical-unicorn state where you can build muscle while shedding body fat.

If you happen to be one of the lucky individuals who can recompose, enjoy it while it lasts, but don’t expect it to happen forever. When you’ve got a year or so of training under your belt, you’re not carrying a lot of extra body fat, and you’re not on drugs, you need to pick a goal—gain muscle or lose fat—and arrange your training and nutrition to support that goal until you pick a new one.





REALISTIC RECAP


To summarize the basic strategy for this program and set the tone for what lies ahead, you’re going to spend a few months getting stronger and building new muscle mass, then switch your focus to shedding the fat that’s covering it up. Add some muscle. Cut some fat. Rinse and repeat.

More specifically, over the first year or two of this program, you’re going to work towards the Tier 1 and Tier 2 strength goals while adding 20–25 pounds of muscle mass and keeping your body fat between 10% and 15%. Tackle these targets and you’ll have achieved above-average strength and muscle mass, below-average body fat, and one hell of a badass body.

Again, this program will be easier for some than for others, but the differences don’t matter. What’s important is that you set a goal and are making measurable progress towards it. Changing your physique—by building a stronger, leaner body—is a slow process. Don’t get discouraged by the fact that it may take you months to hit your first strength goal or get down to 10% body fat. Keep your focus on the next pound you need to add to the bar or shed from your waist each week. Trust that with every step forward, you are becoming a better version of yourself, and take pride in the positive changes you’ve made, no matter how small or insignificant they may seem in the moment. Compound these small victories, and years from now, when you look back on your training career, you’ll be amazed by what you’ve accomplished.





CHAPTER 5





EQUIPMENT





With your approach outlined, your expectations set, and your realistic goals defined, it’s almost time to get under the barbell and begin the program. But before you start, there are several essential items you’ll want to procure in preparation for your first training session. A full, updated list of recommended equipment can be found at: https://www.hornstrength.com/resources.





A GYM


You need a place to lift weights. A big-box commercial gym is fine. A garage gym is better, more convenient, and not all that expensive to build (see the appendix for more information). Whatever you choose, the facility must have, at a minimum, decent Olympic barbells and plates, benches, and squat racks. Cable machines, specialty bars, dumbbells, and adjustable benches are a bonus and can add a little more variety later in the program, but their absence is not a deal-breaker.

Check that the barbells are straight, have decent knurling (the grippy stuff), and aren’t covered in rust. Be sure the weights are round, not shaped like dodecagons that don’t roll. Those plates are very dangerous for deadlifting and, unfortunately, quite common in larger commercial facilities. Finally, make sure the management is okay with the use of chalk and won’t kick you out for performing heavy deadlifts. Many commercial gyms frown upon both.

Check out local YMCAs, powerlifting gyms, big-box chains, boutique fitness studios, and whatever else is in your area. Tour a few places and pick the best option based on your budget, the location, and the equipment available.





WEIGHTLIFTING SHOES


Your shoes are your connection to the ground and thus a very important piece of equipment. Chuck Taylors, Vans, Nike Metcons, running shoes, and those silly foot-shaped Vibrams are not weightlifting shoes and are not appropriate footwear for strength training.

Weightlifting shoes have several things going for them. They are flat, giving you good, solid contact with the floor. They have elevated heels, allowing trainees with limited ankle flexibility to reach the bottom of the squat more easily. The heels are made from a non-compressible material like wood, molded plastic, or dense rubber. For the same reason you wouldn’t want to squat on a mattress, you don’t want to squat in running shoes: the squishy rubber soles not only are unstable but also absorb much of the force you’re generating against the floor—force you’d like to transmit to the bar.

A good pair of lifting shoes is not optional. I’ve seen too many technique errors magically disappear when a client finally puts on a pair of proper footwear. Recommendations are provided at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources, but any dedicated weightlifting shoe will suffice.

You can spend anywhere from $50 to $300 on shoes, but you honestly won’t be able to tell the difference. When you can successfully squat 500 pounds, you can have an opinion on different heel heights. Until then, just get any decent pair of lifting shoes.





FRACTIONAL PLATES


The smallest weight plate in most gyms is 2.5 pounds, which means the smallest increase you can make is 5 pounds (since you have to load both sides of the barbell). That is unsustainable for progressing in the upper-body lifts (press and bench press). You will need a pair of 1.25-pound plates in your gym bag so you can make 2.5-pound jumps. Like shoes, this is not optional. If you insist on making 5-pound jumps, you will get stuck too early in the program.





A BELT


A belt is not a crutch and using one is not cheating. Belts provide a surface for your abdominal muscles to push against and thus contract harder than they could otherwise. Your abs stabilize your spine and help keep your back in normal alignment when lifting heavy weights. Wearing a belt will allow you to maintain proper position and lift more efficiently, thereby reducing the risk of injury.

A quality lifting belt is made of 10 or 13 mm thick leather and is the same width (three or four inches) all the way around. Belts that are smaller in the front and bigger in the back are not ideal. If you are under six feet tall, you want a three-inch belt for all your lifts. If you are over six feet, you’ll want a four-inch belt for squatting and pressing, and probably a three-inch belt to allow you to get into the proper position for the deadlift (four-inch belts tend to dig into the hips and ribs when you’re setting up the deadlift). Don’t skimp on your belt. A good one will last you a lifetime.





CHALK


Your hands connect you to the barbell. Moisture and sweat can make holding onto the bar more difficult, and a slippery grip is dangerous. Chalk soaks up moisture and helps create secure contact between your hands and the bar. If your gym doesn’t provide chalk, you will need to bring your own. If your gym doesn’t allow chalk, liquid chalk is an acceptable alternative, but really, you should find a better gym.

Be mindful of proper gym etiquette when using chalk. Don’t be a disrespectful bro and clap billowing white clouds of dust all over the room—a light coating on the hands is sufficient. Keep your hands over the chalk bowl when you apply it to minimize the mess, and never intentionally break a larger block of chalk into small pieces. A solid chalk block is easier to use than drawing on your hands with tiny fragments.





LIFTING ATTIRE


Stretchy shorts or sweats allow you to move through the proper range of motion without restriction. Avoid anything that doesn’t stretch, like jeans or swim trunks.

If you find that you regularly scrape your shins while deadlifting, wear long socks or sweatpants so you don’t bleed on the equipment. But really, you shouldn’t be cutting up your shins if your technique is correct.

For your upper body, wear a T-shirt that is mostly cotton. T-shirts made of “high-performance” synthetic materials are slippery and make the barbell more likely to slide out of position on your back. And for god’s sake, make sure your T-shirt has sleeves. Sleeves not only keep your sweat off the barbell, but also prevent you from looking like a douchey, narcissistic bro.





A TRAINING LOG


You will need a way to keep detailed notes about each workout. You can use a spreadsheet or an app on your phone, but I’m partial to a good old-fashioned paper notebook that works even if the internet goes out or your battery dies.

Whatever you choose, make sure you write everything down—weights, reps, sets, bodyweight, notes about your session, brilliant existential epiphanies you had under the bar—everything. You want an accurate record of your training history so you can look back at your progress over time and make informed decisions about what worked and what didn’t.





A BATHROOM SCALE


Throughout the program, you’ll need to weigh yourself to evaluate your progress and make sure you’re on track. Any scale will work, but if your budget allows for it, splurge on a digital scale that connects to a handy app on your phone. Every time you step on it, the scale will measure your current weight and compare it to your last weigh-in. At the end of the week, you’ll get a nice little email summary of your progress. It’s not essential, but it’s nice.

Be aware that while many consumer-grade “smart” scales claim to track body composition, these measurements are highly inaccurate. You will, however, be able to see a general trend over time that should loosely correlate with changes in your body weight and what you notice when you look in the mirror.





KITCHEN TOOLS


You probably already have most of the tools you need to prepare the meals recommended in this program. Some of the essential items include a non-stick frying pan, a chef’s knife, a rice cooker, a food scale, a blender, and glass storage containers. A full list of recommended products, including some cool tools to help streamline your meal-prep process, can be found at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources.





MISE EN PLACE


One of the most appealing aspects of strength training is the dramatic changes you can make to how you look and feel with just a barbell, weights, and a few ancillary items. So take a minute to do a personal inventory. Then head over to https://www.hornstrength.com/resources and order whatever you’re missing so you’ve got all the tools you need to start the program.





CHAPTER 6





ESTABLISHING YOUR STARTING POINT





Before you can get to where you want to go, you need to assess where you are right now. The specific goals for each phase of the program will depend on where you’re starting the process, so it’s time to do an honest self-evaluation of your initial body composition and find your current level of strength.





BASELINE BODY COMPOSITION


You don’t need calipers, a measuring tape, or complicated equations to figure out your weight and body composition. Just step on the scale and look in the mirror.



Bodyweight

For a consistent measurement, weigh yourself first thing in the morning, buck naked, after you pee. Since your weight can fluctuate a lot depending on factors like water, whiskey, and sodium intake, it’s best to weigh in a few times a week and average the numbers.

To keep things simple, I’ve divided bodyweight categories into 20-pound increments. Look at the table below and identify the segment you are closest to. It’s okay to round up or down a little. You will use this number, along with your body-composition category, to determine your goals and corresponding meal plan for each phase of the program.





Choose the bodyweight segment you’re closest to.



Body composition

Next you need to make an educated guess about your current level of body fat. Fortunately, you have only three options to choose from. Take your shirt off and look in the mirror. Based on what you see, lump yourself into one of the following categories:



Make an educated guess about your current body composition.



Be honest with yourself. Now is the time to own up to the fact that your current body composition is the result of the choices you’ve made and acknowledge that you have the power to change it by making new, better choices. If you’re unsure what category you fall into, ask a friend.

For illustrative purposes, if you imagine an untrained dude of average height (say, 5'10") who weighs less than 150 pounds, he’s Category 1 (underweight). That same guy at 180 pounds with a little belly is Category 2 (average). And at 230 pounds, unless he’s a professional bodybuilder, he’s likely Category 3 (overweight). You can extrapolate from there.

Height plays a significant role in determining which body-composition category you fall into. If you’re very tall, you’ll probably still qualify as underweight at 180 pounds. If you’re short, 160 pounds might put you in the average category. Do not overthink this. The first category that popped into your head when you read the list is probably the right one. Your subconscious knows what you are.

If you really want to nerd out, go get a Dual-Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA) scan—the gold standard for measuring body composition. There are commercial facilities popping up all over the place where you can get a DEXA scan for around $45. You lie on a table, fully clothed, and in about ten minutes, you’ll have a fairly accurate assessment of your lean body mass, fat, and bone density. I make all the clients in my gym do this when they start the program and again at around the three- or six-month mark. When they see how much muscle they’ve gained or fat they’ve lost, it can be very motivating. This step is not essential, but occasional DEXA scans are an incredibly useful tool to help you develop your ability to see changes in your body and to measure progress. Most clients who didn’t do it before starting training end up wishing they had.

Based on the DEXA results, you can ballpark your starting category. Generally speaking, an untrained guy with body fat around 15% or lower would be considered underweight, around 20% would be average, and 25% or higher would be considered overweight. Here’s a handy visual reference for judging different levels of body fat:



Visual guide for estimating body composition (credit: “SUPERGAL/Shutterstock.com”).





BASELINE STRENGTH


Next, you need to figure out your starting weights for each exercise in the program. If you have some lifting experience, you can use your recent training data. If not, follow the procedure outlined below to determine what weights to use at your first training session.



Learning the lifts

An overview of each lift can be found at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources; however, in-depth instruction on how to perform each movement is beyond the scope of this book because that book has already been written. It’s called Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training, and it provides more detail than you ever wanted about how to lift weights correctly and safely. I will never do a better job than the author, Mark Rippetoe, so I won’t try.

If you don’t know how to perform the basic lifts, then buy the book or check out the Starting Strength website (https://www.startingstrength.com) or their YouTube channel for loads of content about proper lifting technique. If you’re confident that you can perform the lifts properly, buy the book anyway because you’re probably wrong. Seriously. I’ve lost count of the number of guys who have come to my gym, telling me, “My form is mostly good; I just want someone to take a look and make some minor tweaks,” only to get under the bar and show me an absolute train wreck of a squat or deadlift.

If it’s in your budget, I highly recommend booking an in-person session or two with a qualified strength coach (visit https://coaching.startingstrength.com for recommendations). Expert instruction from a certified, experienced coach will help you do the lifts correctly from day one and avoid the all-too-common mistakes and setbacks that lead to stalled progress, frustration, injuries, and wasted time in the gym.

You can tell the coach you’ve got a program and you just want them to tune up your form. The best approach is to do one session to learn the lifts, go practice on your own, and then return for a follow-up session a few weeks later to solidify the technique. Two sessions are ideal, but any in-person coaching is better than none.

Alternatively, there are some good options for remote/online training if you can’t find a qualified coach in your area. Visit https://www.hornstrength.com/resources for more information.



Safety measures

Before you head to the gym, take a moment to review the safety guidelines in the appendix to better understand how to set up the equipment and protect yourself (and others) during your training sessions. This is important. Nothing derails your progress like an injury that could have been avoided.



Finding your starting weights

Figuring out what weight to use for each exercise is a simple process. Head to the gym and make a beeline for the squat rack. If it’s occupied, politely tell the guy, “Beat it, bro! I’ve gotta jack some steel!” I’m kidding. Don’t do that until you’re sure you lift more than he does.

When the rack is available, set up the empty barbell at a height that touches your upper chest (about two inches above your nipples) and perform two sets of five reps to get your body warmed up. Note that every time you perform an exercise in this program, you will warm up with one or two sets with just the empty bar. Next, add a little weight to the bar and perform another set of five reps. How much weight you add depends on the exercise and your current level of strength. Typically, a new lifter can make 20-to-50-pound jumps for the lower-body lifts (squats and deadlifts) and 10-to-20-pound jumps on the upper-body exercises (press and bench press). Again, this process doesn’t have to be exact. Just add some weight in an increment that’s easy to load.

Rest as needed (about three minutes) between sets, and repeat this process, adding a little weight and performing sets of five reps, until you find a weight that feels challenging. When you suspect that another increase would cause a breakdown in your form, stop, and write that number down in your training log. That’s your starting weight for the program. If you overshoot, and your technique gets sloppy, don’t worry. Just use the weight from the previous set as your starting point. Here’s an example:



Sample progression to find your starting weights.



Again, you’re looking for a moderately heavy set of five reps. There should be absolutely no breakdown in your technique. If you start too heavy, you’ll get stuck too soon, before your body has a chance to adapt to the stress and build the muscle you need to lift more weight. Don’t get greedy; leave your ego at home and be conservative. Starting too heavy is a surefire way to fail early. You need a little runway to get acclimated to the movements before you pile more weight on the bar. Trust me—it’ll get heavy soon enough.

When you’ve found your starting weight for the squat, strip the plates down to the empty bar. Assuming no one is waiting to use the rack, repeat the same process to find your weight for the press (the bar should remain at the same height you used for squats). When you’re done with the press, do the same thing for the bench press and then the deadlift.

The deadlift will not start with an empty bar because it needs to be elevated to the proper height (mid-shin level), not lying on the floor. At most commercial gyms, this will mean starting with 135 pounds (a 45-pound plate on each side of the bar). If this is too heavy, and your gym is equipped with bumper plates (rubberized plates of varying weights that are all the same diameter), you can use 10s or 25s. Otherwise, you might need to get creative by placing the bar across the adjustable safety pins in the squat rack or stacking some plates on the ground to elevate the barbell to the proper mid-shin height (see photos).



If 45-pound plates are too heavy, use smaller plates and elevate the barbell to mid-shin level by placing it across the safeties in the squat rack.





An alternative way to elevate the barbell when using smaller plates in the deadlift.



Once you’ve worked your way up to a heavy set of five reps for each exercise and noted the weights in your training log, grab your stuff and head home. You’re ready to begin the program.





CHAPTER 7





THE NOVICE PROGRAM





Any intelligently designed strength training program will center around just a few basic barbell lifts: squat, press, bench press, and deadlift. These four exercises represent a complete, full-body workout. As you progress through the three training templates that constitute the novice program, you’ll introduce a few assistance exercises for variety and to emphasize certain aspects of your physique (arms, shoulders, lats, etc.), but you don’t need anything more than “the Big Four” to start building a strong, muscular body.

These core exercises will be the centerpiece of your training throughout the program, so it’s important that you start getting good at them right away through frequent exposure and lots of repetition. The most logical way to arrange these lifts was popularized by Mark Rippetoe in Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training, and it looks like this:



Exercise order for the novice program.



Squats build big legs and butts, and deadlifts build big backs and big traps—essential elements of a powerful-looking physique. These two exercises are the primary drivers of overall strength. They work a lot of muscle mass at one time and produce sufficient stress that signals your body to grow. They also teach you how to do things that are hard—a very useful skill both in and out of the gym. So for the first few weeks of training, you’re going to practice squats and deadlifts in every workout.

The bench press and the press are equally important movements for developing your upper body. They each work the muscles of the chest, shoulders, and arms in slightly different, but complementary ways. To cover your bases, and balance the stress across the upper body, you’ll alternate them in each workout.

With this exercise structure in place, you can start plugging in set and repetition schemes that provide enough practice for you to begin mastering these fundamental movements.





SETS AND REPS


Each exercise in the program (except for the deadlift) will follow the ascending-fives format outlined by Bill Starr in his classic book, The Strongest Shall Survive. Ascending fives are a fast and efficient way to pack a lot of reps into a short amount of time.

As the name suggests, you’ll perform five sets of five repetitions, ascending in weight up to the final, heaviest set (a.k.a. the “top set”). The sets preceding your top set are based on a percentage of the final weight. If you consider your top set to be 100% × 5 (weight × reps), the preceding sets will be 60% × 5, 70% × 5, 80% × 5, and 90% × 5. If, for example, you determine that 135 pounds is a good starting weight for squats, your top set (100%) is 135 pounds. From there, you can use the percentages to calculate the rest of the workout. It looks like this:



Weight, reps, and sets for the novice program. Use ascending fives for all exercises except the deadlift.



Don’t worry about using the exact weight calculated for each set. You can round squats and deadlifts to the nearest 5-pound increment and round presses and bench presses to the nearest 2.5-pound jump.

Deadlifts are different. Because the deadlift is quite taxing and comes at the end of the workout, after you’ve sufficiently warmed up your body with squats and presses, you’re going to taper the reps in each set down as you increase the weight leading up to your top set:



Deadlifts follow a different protocol.



This progression will ensure that you don’t completely exhaust yourself with excessive deadlift warmups before getting to your heaviest weight. Trust me—when it comes to the deadlift, less is more.





WHY FIVES?


Different rep ranges create different physiological adaptations. For illustrative purposes, it’s helpful to imagine extremes. Take a set of 25 reps. By the end of the set, your muscles are tired, pumped full of blood, and filled with lactate and other metabolic waste products. But sets of 25 reps won’t make you much stronger or much bigger because anything you can lift for 25 times is, by definition, not heavy enough to cause the type of stress and motor-unit recruitment needed for growth. Instead, the adaptation produced by lightweight, high-rep sets is primarily one of muscular endurance. Your body gets better at lifting light weights and clearing waste products from your blood. Again, this is why running a marathon doesn’t make your legs very big.

Now imagine the other extreme. Take, for example, a one-rep max (1RM) attempt. This is the heaviest weight you can lift for one repetition. The adaptation here is one of absolute strength. The problem with doing one really heavy rep is that, well, it’s fucking heavy—so heavy, in fact, that your form is likely to break down, and your risk of injury goes way up. Moreover, heavy singles are not ideal for honing your technique because one rep doesn’t provide much of an opportunity to practice the movement pattern. Workouts based on heavy singles also take a long time to complete since you need several minutes of rest between each attempt. If you do fifteen singles, finishing one exercise might take you forty-five to sixty minutes. Most of us don’t have that kind of time.

Sets of five reps are a great blend of the adaptations you’re chasing in this first phase of your training. They’re heavy enough to make you stronger but light enough that you can perform several reps and work on dialing in your technique without unnecessary risk of injury.





THE FIRST TWELVE WORKOUTS


Now, let’s put it all together. Take a look at the following template. This will be your training program for the first twelve sessions. As you will see, it is focused exclusively on the Big Four lifts, with enough sets and reps for you to get in a lot of practice at moderate weights and start developing a feel for each movement. The only change you’ll make in each session will be to increase the weight a small amount, which I’ll discuss in a moment. Plug in your starting weights for each exercise to see what your first week of training will look like. Then review the important details below.



The first twelve workouts for the novice program.





PROGRAM DETAILS


Schedule

The novice program can be done two or three days per week. For adequate recovery, the workouts should be spaced evenly throughout the week so there is at least one rest day between each training session. A Monday/Thursday or Tuesday/Friday schedule works well for a twice-per-week schedule.

If you like the idea of training more frequently, or are just a glutton for punishment, you can alternate workouts A and B on a three-day schedule (i.e., ABA, BAB, ABA, etc.). Using a Monday/Wednesday/Friday or Tuesday/Thursday/Saturday rotation leaves one rest day between each workout and a two-day break at the end of the week for some extra recovery.

Should you need to adjust your training days because of a scheduling conflict, it’s always better to add an extra day of rest rather than subtract one. So Monday/Thursday could become Monday/Friday if need be. Or if you’re training three days a week and a conflict arises, just switch to the two-day schedule (e.g., Monday/Thursday) for that week and then return to your Monday/Wednesday/Friday arrangement the following week.



Warming up

For most lifters, warming up by doing one set of 10 reps with the empty barbell at the start of your training session is sufficient. One of the main benefits of the ascending-fives structure is that the warmup sets are built into the workout. By the time you get to the top set, you’ll have had plenty of reps to get your body and mind prepared for the final effort. If, however, you train early in the morning or in cold weather, or you just feel like you’d benefit from a bit more of a warmup, I recommend jumping on an exercise bike, a rowing machine, or the like for about five minutes at a moderate pace.

A few savvy physical therapists have carved out a profitable niche convincing trainees they need to spend a bunch of time rolling around on the floor doing “mobility work” before they start their workouts. Unless you have a specific injury or range-of-motion issue that demands extra attention, this is unnecessary. Just get under the bar and get to work.



Rounding the first set

Your first working set is listed at 60% of the weight you’ll use for your final, heaviest set. Sixty percent is so light that it doesn’t contribute much to the overall stress of the workout, so for the sake of convenience, it’s perfectly acceptable to round the first set to a weight that is easier to load on the barbell. For example, if your top-set weight is 250 pounds, you’ll calculate your first set at 150 pounds (60% of 250). Loading 150 pounds means you’d need to put a 45-pound plate, a 5-pound plate, and a 2.5-pound plate on each side of the bar. That’s an annoying weight to load. So to make your life easier, just start with 135 pounds (one 45-pound plate on each side) and then move on to your 70% set. As a general rule, if your top-set weight is between 135 and 225 pounds, you can use 95 pounds (one 25-pound plate on each side) for your first set. Once you cross the 225-pound threshold for the top set, use 135 pounds for your first set. After that, stay close to the listed percentages.





Resting between sets

Another advantage of the ascending-fives structure is that it can be done quickly with minimal rest. The first few sets are light enough that you don’t need much of a break between them. Just change the weights, take a sip of water, and do the next set.

The important rest period will come before your final, heaviest set. When you begin the program and the weights are light, a three-to-five-minute break before the last set is sufficient. As your sets get heavier and more challenging, five minutes will become the standard, at least for squats and deadlifts. Some very strong lifters may need up to ten minutes of rest before their final sets.

Remember, the goal is to complete your assigned reps for the day. If you rush into the last set and aren’t sufficiently recovered, you may miss a rep you wouldn’t have missed if you had just rested an extra minute or two. Ninety seconds of rest isn’t long enough if you’ve got 405 pounds on the bar. Take the time you need to ensure that you’ve got the best chance of finishing your top set.



Adding weight

Leveraging the power of progressive overload to build strength and size means consistently adding more weight to the bar. The goal is to do this every time you train for as long as possible. You can’t do this forever, but as a novice lifter, you can do it for a lot longer than you might expect.

How much weight you add each session will depend on the exercise and how long you’ve been doing it. For the lower-body lifts (squat and deadlift), you’ll start by making 5-to-10-pound jumps every session, starting with 10-pound increases and then, as workouts become more challenging, dropping to 5-pound jumps. For the upper-body lifts (press and bench press), which utilize smaller muscles and are more sensitive to increases in load, you’ll begin the program with 5-pound jumps and then move down to 2.5-pound jumps.

As I mentioned earlier, to make a 2.5-pound jump (micro-load), you’ll need to have a pair of 1.25-pound plates in your gym bag since most commercial gyms do not carry plates smaller than 2.5 pounds, which means a 5-pound jump is your smallest possible increase. Five-pound jumps will not work on the upper-body lifts for very long. You must micro-load with 2.5-pound increases or you will get stuck too early in the program. Remember, you’re looking for small, incremental progress over a long period of time.

When it comes to increasing the weight on the bar, don’t be in a hurry, and don’t get greedy. If the top set felt light, bump it up 10 pounds at your next session. If the set was challenging, stick to 2.5–5 lb. increases. You’ll eventually end up in the same spot, so keep your ego in check and progress conservatively.





THE NEXT TWELVE WORKOUTS


Now that you’ve familiarized yourself with the basic lifts, you’re going to make a few small changes to the program and introduce some new exercises. Take a moment to look over the template for workouts 13–24. Then see the important details below.



In the second phase of the novice program, you will alternate deadlifts and chin-ups/lat-pulldowns each session.





PROGRAM DETAILS


Reduced deadlift frequency

With twelve sessions under your belt, the first change you’re going to make is to stop deadlifting every workout. This is done for two reasons.

First, deadlifts are very stressful. As the weight increases, so do the recovery demands, and you will eventually need more than two to three days of rest between sets of heavy deadlifts. By reducing the deadlift frequency to every other workout, you can ensure that you have the resources available to lift heavy, recover adequately, and keep driving up the weight without getting stuck early.

The second reason to cut the deadlift frequency is to make room for another exercise. In this case, you’ll be adding chin-ups if you can do them or lat-pulldowns if you can’t—exercises that develop the muscles of the back, abdominals, and arms and help build an impressive-looking, tapered physique.



Chin-ups

Chin-ups are done from a dead hang, arms fully extended, knees dangling below the waist, with a supine (palms-facing-you) grip. No half-assing the range of motion or doing some swinging CrossFit-style kipping bullshit (check out the demo video at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources for instructions on proper technique).

Your first goal with chin-ups is to get to the point where you can complete 10 reps in the first of three sets. This will be a challenge for many new trainees. That’s fine. Each workout, simply try to add one rep to the first set until you can successfully complete 10 reps. Don’t worry about the subsequent sets—just get as many reps as you can. Be sure to rest two to three minutes between each set.

Once you’re able to complete 10 bodyweight chin-ups on your first set, you’ll need to add some weight using a dip belt (a special belt used to hang a weight plate from the hips) or by holding a dumbbell between your thighs and crossing your legs. Start by hanging 5–10 pounds off your waist and performing three sets of as many reps as possible (abbreviated as AMRAP). When you’re able to complete 10 reps in the first set, add 2.5–5 pounds at the next workout. Again, don’t worry about the subsequent sets—just do your best and move on. The goal is to drive up the reps in the first set and then, when you can complete all 10, add a little more weight and repeat.

Chin-ups do not progress like the other exercises, mainly because they tend to get harder as you get heavier (which, for most of you, is the goal during the first phase of your training). You may be stuck at a certain number of reps for several weeks before you’re finally able to squeeze out another one. That’s okay—if you’re able to do the same number of reps each week as your bodyweight increases, you are getting stronger even though the rep count remains the same. Don’t get frustrated if your progress on chin-ups is slow. Remember, you’re striving for steady, incremental progress over time. As you build strength on the primary lifts (squat, bench, press, and deadlift), your performance on chin-ups should improve.



Assisted chin-ups and lat-pulldowns

Not everyone can do chin-ups. If you’re carrying a lot of excess body fat, if your tendons happen to attach to your bones at a suboptimal insertion angle, or if you’re just a heavy dude, it can be almost impossible to do a chin-up until you lose a substantial amount of weight, and even then, it might not be in the cards. In this case, you’ll substitute assisted chin-ups or lat-pulldowns for the chin-ups. (Check out the videos at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources for a demonstration of how to perform each exercise).



Assisted chin-ups

If you can’t do a single bodyweight chin-up, you can use rubber resistance bands to help you. You can pick up a set of resistance bands in various colors and sizes online.

To perform assisted chins, loop the rubber band over the middle of the chin-up bar and, depending on how tall you are, place either your knee or your foot into the band (if your feet touch the floor when you’re hanging from the bar, use your knee). Then, from a dead hang, simply pull yourself up until your chin crosses the bar.

Start with a band (or combination of bands) that allows you to get about eight reps in the first of three sets. Stick with that band each workout until you’re able to complete 10 reps in set one. Then, at the next workout, drop down to a thinner band and repeat the process. When you can complete 10 reps with the thinnest band you have (usually the red one), ditch the bands altogether, and switch to bodyweight chin-ups moving forward.



Lat-pulldowns

For some particularly heavy trainees, even assisted chins can be too difficult and awkward to perform. If this is the case, you can substitute lat-pulldowns if your gym is equipped with such a machine. The goal with lat-pulldowns is slightly different. You’ll perform three sets of 8–10 reps with about two to three minutes of rest between each set. The first time you do this exercise, work your way up, over the course of a few sets, to a weight that causes you to fail somewhere around rep 9 or 10. At your next session, use that weight for all three sets.

To warm up for lat-pulldowns, perform one set of 8–10 reps with about half the weight you’ll use for your heavier working sets. It doesn’t have to be exactly half; just use whatever is close on the weight stack. After resting two to three minutes, move the selector pin to your work weight, and perform your first set with the goal of getting all 10 reps. It’s okay if you don’t make it, but 10 is the target (if you get fewer than 8 reps in the first set, it’s too heavy). Rest two to three minutes and repeat the process for a total of three sets.

All sets should be done to failure—meaning you could not perform another repetition with good form. Do not leave anything in the tank, but do not compromise your technique by leaning back and using momentum to move the weight. It’s better to use lighter weight and have perfect form than to flail around like a fool.

To progress with lat-pulldowns, add a small amount of weight (2.5–5 pounds) only when you are able to complete all 10 reps in the first set and at least 8 reps in the subsequent two sets. Otherwise, remain at the same weight for each workout until you meet that criterion. So, for example, if your reps per sets were 10–9–8, you would add weight at the next session, but if you did 10–9–6 or 9–8–8, you would stay at the same weight until you completed 10 reps in the first set and at least 8 reps in both subsequent sets.

Some lat-pulldown machines include small weights that allow you to easily add 2–5 pounds to the stack. If your machine doesn’t have this capability, you may need to get creative by either resting a dumbbell across the top of the weight stack or threading the selector pin through a small plate (see photo).



Small increases in weight can be made by threading the selector pin through a plate.





WORKOUTS 25 AND BEYOND


After twenty-four sessions, it’s time to move to the third and final novice template. You will run this program until it stops working, which will typically occur within three to six months. Later in this chapter, I’ll discuss what it means when the program “stops working.” For now, review the following template and then look at the important details below to understand the changes.



In the final novice program template, squat frequency is reduced to make room for curls and LTEs.





PROGRAM DETAILS


Reduced squat frequency

For this final stretch of the novice phase, squats are reduced to every other session. As with the deadlift, this reduction in frequency is meant not only to give you more rest and recovery as the stress from each workout increases, but also to make room for some new assistance exercises, like lying triceps extensions (LTEs) and curls. Yes, you read that correctly: motherfucking curls. You’re welcome.



Adding light squats and deadlifts

Most of you will do fine squatting once or twice a week. Some lifters using a two-day training schedule, however, may find that going seven days without squatting makes the movement feel rusty and awkward. In that case, you’re welcome to add some light squats back into the program in workout B by working up to 80% of the weight you used at workout A, using ascending sets of five reps (60% × 5, 70% × 5, 80% × 5). There’s nothing wrong with this approach; it just makes the workout take a little longer.

Similarly, if you’re following a three-day schedule, you may find that deadlifting heavy twice in one week is difficult to sustain. In this case, you can make the second deadlift workout lighter by following the same protocol outlined above for light squats and working up to 80% of the top-set weight used for your heavy deadlift.

Light squats and deadlifts aren’t always necessary, but they can be effective tools for managing fatigue towards the end of your novice phase. Experiment with different setups and decide what works best for you.



New assistance exercises

The bulk of your gains will come from progressing in the big, compound lifts (squat, bench press, deadlift, and press), but sprinkling in some “bro-stuff” can be useful (and fun). By this point in your training, the bench and press should be getting more challenging. Adding assistance exercises like curls and LTEs that provide extra stress for the biceps and triceps is one of the best ways to keep the primary lifts from getting stuck.

Additionally, there are some powerful psychological benefits to tacking on a few sets of arm work to the end of your session. Ultimately, you’re training because you want to feel good and look good, and though it’s rather short-lived, a nice little arm-pump that might earn you a compliment from your training partner or your gym crush can serve as a small reminder that all your hard work is paying off. Your body is changing and people are noticing—that’s not trivial. And right now, in the final stretch of the novice phase, when workouts are getting more challenging, you should use anything you can to stay motivated.



Lying triceps extensions (LTEs)

Powerlifting legend Larry Pacifico referred to LTEs as “the fourth powerlift,” and they are one the most effective assistance exercises for improving your strength on the bench and press. Think of LTEs as squats for your arms. Done correctly, they work a bunch of muscle mass over a long range of motion and can be done with relatively heavy weights. Since your triceps make up well over half of the muscle mass of your upper arms, adding LTEs will not only improve your pressing performance, but also make you look more impressive. Win-win!



Curls

To be successful in any service business, you have to give your customers a lot of what they need and a little bit of what they want. The gym business is no exception, and curls definitely fall into the category of “things dudes want.”

Yes, curls will help you improve your performance on chin-ups, but they don’t contribute nearly as much to your overall upper-body strength as LTEs do. Nonetheless, a few sets of curls will pump your arms full of blood and provide a much-needed boost of encouragement to keep you excited about your training when you catch a glimpse of your jacked arms in the mirror.

Do you need to do curls to develop an awesome physique? Absolutely not. Chin-ups provide plenty of work for the biceps, but the addition of some curls at the end of your workout certainly won’t hurt and may help a little bit. So let’s put them into the category of “things you do to have fun and stay motivated,” and embrace the power of the pump.



Progressing with LTEs and curls

LTEs and curls are performed using the same protocol as lat-pulldowns—two to three sets of 8–10 reps with about two to three minutes of rest between sets.

The first time you do these exercises, you’ll need to find your starting weight. To do this, start with the empty bar and do a set of 10 reps. Then, add some weight and do another set of 10 reps. Repeat this process with a few minutes of rest between sets until you find a weight that causes you to reach technical failure (meaning you are unable to complete any more reps with good form) at around rep 10. Stop there and use that same weight for all your sets at the next workout.

Do not start too heavy. Be conservative, and always use strict technique. Sloppy reps do you no good and shift the work and stress to other areas of the body you aren’t targeting. Nobody cares how much weight you can curl or LTE. Pick a moderate weight you can use to properly stimulate the muscles. High-quality reps with near-perfect form are the key to growth.

When you can do 10 reps in your first set, and at least 8 reps in the subsequent sets, add some weight (2.5–5 pounds) at the next workout. Expect to stay at each new weight for a couple workouts, driving up the reps, before increasing the load.





GETTING STUCK AND MOVING ON


You will run the final novice template until it stops working, meaning that you’ve reached the point at which you are unable to increase the weight on the bar and you begin to miss reps on the primary barbell exercises—usually on the last set. For new trainees, this typically occurs around three to six months into the program. For trainees who have previous strength-training experience, the novice program may last only a month or two. Regardless, if you can lift more weight every workout, don’t screw with the program. Ride the wave of steady progress until it stops producing results. But you can’t just keep piling weight onto the bar indefinitely—if we could, I’d be deadlifting my pickup truck by now.

At some point, no matter how dialed in you are with your training and nutrition, you will not be able to complete all the reps in a workout. You’ll take the bar down to the bottom of a squat, for example, and you won’t come back up. When this happens, or gets close to happening, don’t panic or throw a tantrum. It’s part of the process, and you need to know how to deal with it and what strategies are available to squeeze out a little more progress before moving on to the next phase of your training.



Try again

Whenever you fail to complete the target number of reps on an exercise, try the same weight again at the next session. Here’s the rule: In the novice phase, you’re allowed to miss a rep at a minimum of two but no more than three consecutive workouts before adjusting your program. This means you do not make any changes to your training based on one shitty workout. Everyone has bad days. Often, with a good night’s sleep and a little more food, you’ll be able to complete the next workout and keep going with your program as planned. If, however, you try the same weight two or three more times and still cannot complete all of your sets and reps, it’s time to perform a reset.



Reset the top set

To reset an exercise that has stalled, simply reduce the weight of your top set by 10% and start again. So, for example, if you failed to complete all five reps of 225 pounds on your top set of the bench press for two consecutive workouts, you’d drop the weight down to 202.5 pounds at the next training session. When a reset becomes necessary, don’t be discouraged. You still have an opportunity to make progress.

Once you reset an exercise, the final top set should be done for as many reps as possible (AMRAP). Since the weight is lower, you can probably eke out more than five reps for several weeks. Using the example above, when you reset the weight from 225 pounds to 202.5 pounds, you’ll likely be able to get seven to eight reps in your final set and perhaps more. Doing more reps at a given weight than was previously possible is called a “rep PR” and will be a feature of your training in the intermediate and advanced phases of the program.

As a rule, you should reset each exercise only once, and as long as you are able to get at least three reps in your top set, keep increasing the weight by a small amount at each subsequent workout. When, after a reset, you get to the point that you are unable to complete three reps in your top set, it’s time to move on to the intermediate program.



Train less frequently

Performing heavy squats and deadlifts more than once a week can become increasingly difficult in the later stages of the novice program as you accumulate more stress at each training session. If you’re following a three-times-per-week schedule and struggling to finish all the reps in your top set, cutting your training frequency down to only two days per week may provide some additional recovery and prevent you from getting stuck early.



Stalling early

Failing a lift should not occur until you’re nearing the end of your novice phase (around the three-to-six-month mark). If, however, a pattern of missed reps emerges early in the program, it’s likely that you’re making one of four common mistakes:

You started too heavy: When you begin the program, the weight used for your top set should be challenging, but light enough that you can complete all five reps with perfect form. Be conservative and err on the side of starting too light to give your body a chance to adapt to the new stress and avoid getting stuck too soon.



You’re making jumps in weight that are too aggressive: Remember, after the first few weeks of training, you must micro-load the press and bench press with 2.5-pound increments. Stick with 5-pound jumps on the squat and deadlift.



You’re not resting long enough between your heavy sets: Three to five minutes of rest are usually required for sets over 80%. Take the time necessary to get all your reps.



You’re not eating enough food to recover and grow: Make sure you’re adhering to your meal plan (covered in Chapters 10–12) so that your bodyweight is slowly, but steadily, moving up during the novice phase. No program will work for very long if you aren’t consuming enough calories to grow.



If you’re making one of these mistakes early in your training and it’s causing you to miss reps, back off the weight a little bit (usually 5–10 pounds on the upper-body lifts and 10–20 pounds on the lower-body lifts), address the problem, and start again.



Ending the novice program

If you make it at least three to six months into the program before starting to miss the last rep of your last set, it usually means you’ve been doing everything right with regard to training and nutrition, you’ve avoided all the aforementioned ways to fuck up early, and you are simply approaching the end of the novice phase.

Some lifts will get stuck before others. Usually, the press and bench press are the first to go, followed by the squat. The deadlift may not get stuck at all. The squat should dictate when you end the novice phase. If you’re stuck on the upper-body lifts, but still making progress on the lower-body lifts, simply perform a reset on the exercises that have stalled. When the squat finally stalls (meaning you’ve failed to complete all five reps in your top set at two or three consecutive workouts), it’s time to advance to the next phase of training.

The novice phase will be the most productive point in your lifting career. With consistent training and proper nutrition, most of you will be able to make progress for several months before the program stops producing measurable increases in strength. The longer you’re able to stay in the novice phase, the bigger and stronger you’ll get. The goal, then, is to milk the final novice template for all it’s worth, maximize your newbie gains, and then move on to the intermediate training program.





CHAPTER 8





THE INTERMEDIATE PROGRAM





By the end of the novice phase, you’ll be more technically proficient in the foundational exercises. You’ll have added more weight to the bar and more muscle mass to your frame. You will be an undeniably stronger and bigger dude, and you’ll have a better understanding of how to train effectively than most of the other people in your gym (including the personal trainers).

More importantly, you’ll have grown accustomed to doing things that are hard. You’ll have developed more confidence, discipline, and grit, and you’ll realize you have the ability to improve the way you look, feel, and perform with a radically simple, straightforward training program devoid of any silly bullshit.

Hopefully, you’ll be motivated by your progress and hungry for more—because we’re just getting started. There are more weights to lift and more personal records to smash, and there’s more muscle mass to gain and, eventually, more body fat to lose. Welcome to the intermediate stage.





CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE INTERMEDIATE TRAINEE


Because you’re now stronger and capable of moving heavier loads, managing the relationship between the stress you can apply to your body at each workout and your ability to recover from that stress becomes a more delicate balancing act. Fail to generate enough stress, and you won’t create the stimulus needed to cause the desired adaptation (i.e., more strength and muscle mass). Add too much stress, however, and you’ll exceed your ability to recover from the workout, and progress will grind to a halt.

Moreover, once you’re outside the novice phase, your priorities will change periodically. When you were a new trainee, your goal was simply to get bigger and stronger. At some point during the intermediate phase, however, you’ll switch your focus from gaining muscle mass to reducing body fat.

Your training program, therefore, must be flexible enough to accommodate these different objectives, allowing you not only to push yourself to new levels of strength and size during gaining periods, but also to avoid overdoing it in periods of focused fat loss when calories are restricted and your energy levels are diminished. And of course, your workouts still need to be short and sweet to prevent burnout and keep you excited about your training.

The radically simple intermediate program addresses all these criteria. It’s an adaptable template designed to be used in both the gaining and cutting phases of training, and it can be utilized throughout your training career with only minor tweaks needed to sustain progress.

This is the program I’m most excited to share with you. It took me years of trial and error to develop, and I’ve tested it on countless clients with amazing results. It’s the program I continually return to in my own training because it’s simple and it works.

There are two intermediate templates to choose from. Template A is a continuation of the full-body workout structure used in the novice program, whereas the workouts in Template B are arranged into upper-body days (i.e., bench press and press) and lower-body days (i.e., squat and deadlift). Both templates use a slightly different set–rep framework than the novice program and include a few new assistance exercises. Take a look at the intermediate templates, and then review the important details that follow to understand the differences and determine which option will work best for you.



The two-day, full-body version of the intermediate program. The plus symbol (+) indicates that you may try to exceed the prescribed number of reps on a particular set if possible.





The four-day, “upper/lower” intermediate template. Lighter sets of the primary barbell lifts help keep the movement pattern fresh between heavy training sessions. The top-set weight used on light days is 85% of the top-set weight used on the heavier day.





PROGRAM DETAILS


Schedule

Intermediate Template A is a two-day-per-week, full-body training program. Getting to the gym two days a week is a fairly reasonable ask and fits nicely into most people’s schedules. It’s also more flexible than most three or four-day programs since you can easily push a workout forward or back a day if a conflict arises and still get all your training done for the week.

Moreover, as you get stronger and can lift heavier weights, ensuring that you have adequate rest and recovery between workouts is much more important than when you’re just starting out. Pushing too hard too frequently without allowing your body to repair and rebuild is counterproductive, but any average dude can handle two training sessions per week.

There is also a psychological benefit to having to be in the gym only twice a week: You’re much less likely to burn out. Training should be (mostly) fun, but I’ll be the first to admit, these workouts are (intentionally) repetitive, and they get harder every time. Consistency is the real key to progress, and if you start to dread your workouts or feel like your gym/life balance is off, you’ll quickly lose motivation. But with only two sessions per week, you’ll find yourself looking forward to your next training session and pushing harder to make each one of your limited sets and reps as productive as possible.

Now, for those of you who have a convenient home gym, or simply prefer to train more frequently, Intermediate Template B includes four workouts (two upper-body sessions and two lower-body sessions) that can be arranged in different ways to accommodate any schedule.

For example, you can run the four workouts on a Monday/Tuesday/Thursday/Friday schedule, or you can spread them over a three-day schedule (i.e., Monday, Wednesday, Friday, Monday, etc.). The advantage of the latter option is the additional day of rest between sessions. Or, if I sold you on the idea of training only two days per week, you can even run the four-day program over two full weeks (i.e., Monday, Thursday, Monday, Thursday).

There are pros and cons to both intermediate training templates. Template A requires you to be in the gym only two days per week, but since you have to tackle two of the four main barbell exercises in each session, the workouts are a bit longer and harder than in the four-day program. Template B has you in the gym more often, but with only one major lift each session, the workouts are shorter and easier, and they provide more opportunities to incorporate new assistance exercises (more on that later).

Personally, I use Template B in my own training, and I run the four workouts over a three-day schedule. My gym is at my home, so training more frequently isn’t an inconvenience. This schedule allows me to finish each workout in an hour or less. Also, I find that I push myself harder on squats and deadlifts when I have only one difficult thing to do that day.

If it’s your first time through the program, I recommend starting with Template A and then moving to Template B when your progress stalls or you’re tired of full-body workouts and eager for some variety. Ultimately, either configuration will work. Experiment with the different setups and use the one that suits you best.





Introducing rep ranges and back-off sets

The main difference between the novice and intermediate programs is that the ascending sets of five reps have been replaced with warmup sets with fewer reps, a top set, and a “back-off” set (a set done with lighter weights after your top set). Since you’re now more technically proficient with each lift, you can cut some of the lighter warmup reps used for practice during the novice phase and shift them to heavier, more productive work sets.

You’ll also notice that the top set and back-off set for each primary exercise now have target rep ranges, like three to five reps or five to eight reps. With any rep range, your goal is to hit the top end of the range, and you will increase the weight only when you’re able to complete all the reps. So, for example, if you get four reps in your top set of presses, you’ll repeat the same weight at the next workout with the goal of eventually getting all five. When you do, you’ll bump the weight up at the next session.

Using this method, it may take several weeks to push your reps up to the top of the range. That’s fine. As long as you're increasing either the reps or the weight, you’re getting stronger.

Rep ranges add a layer of flexibility to your program and allow you to account for the fact that as an intermediate trainee, you aren’t always going to crush your workouts, especially in periods of focused fat loss when calories are restricted. Some days you’ll feel great, while other days you’ll have just-gotta-get-through-this sessions. When the latter workouts inevitably arrive, you want to have some wiggle room in your program so you can still train to the best of your ability on any given day and not feel like a total failure for coming up a rep or two short of your goal.

After the top set of each exercise, you’ll perform a back-off set. Because they’re lighter, back-off sets are a great way to add training stress and to practice your technique without beating the shit out of yourself with a bunch of heavy, grinding reps.

Like the top set, back-off sets also use target rep ranges, but with one difference: you can exceed the top end of the range. The plus symbol next to the rep range (e.g., 5–8+) means that if you’re able to do more than eight reps, keep going, but do your best to avoid failing. If you don’t think you’ll be able to complete the next rep, stop.

When you can complete all the reps in the range, increase the weight at the next session. Otherwise, repeat the same weight at your next workout and focus on increasing the number of reps you’re able to perform.



Dealing with deadlifts

By the time you reach the intermediate stage, your deadlifts should be hard—hard to do and hard to recover from. Because of this, you’re going to treat them a little differently than the other exercises in the program by making the back-off set optional.

In keeping with the less-is-more approach to deadlifting, you will perform the back-off set only if you fail to get within the designated rep range in your top set. As long as you are able to finish at least three reps of the deadlift, you can omit the back-off set. (How’s that for a little motivation?) If you get fewer than three reps, however, you will perform a back-off set at 85% of your top-set weight for five to eight reps.

So long as you’re increasing the reps or the weight in your top set of deadlifts, there is no need to add additional stress that may interfere with your ability to recover. But if you start to regress and drop below the bottom of the rep range, doing a back-off set will likely provide some additional stimulus to get things moving in the right direction again.



Determining your starting weights

To begin the intermediate program, use the weight of your last successful set of five reps from the end of the novice phase for your top set (100%). Your back-off set will start at 85% of whatever weight you use for the top set.

If your last set of five in the novice program was particularly difficult and you were unable to maintain reasonably good form, or if you’re barely able to hit the bottom end of the target rep range at your first intermediate workout, you should back off the top-set weight by 5–10 pounds on the press and bench press, and 10–20 pounds on the squat and deadlift. Giving yourself a little headroom when starting this new program will prevent you from getting stuck too early. You will make more progress over a longer period by starting out conservatively and giving your body a chance to adapt to the training stress.



Increasing the weights

When you’re able to complete all the reps in the range, you’ll increase the weight at the next session—5 pounds on the squat and deadlift and 2.5 pounds on the press and bench press. This is important: top sets and back-off sets progress independently. When you begin the program, the weight used for your back-off set will be 85% of your top-set weight. This is just a starting point. As you work through the program, you will increase the weight of either set whenever you hit the top end of the rep range, regardless of how you perform on the other set. So, for example, if you can complete only three reps in your top set of the bench press, but get all eight reps in your back-off set, you will repeat the weight for the top set and increase the weight of the back-off set.

Do your best to not miss any reps on the primary barbell lifts, particularly the squat and deadlift. Taking these exercises to absolute failure is very taxing and can interfere with your ability to recover from your workouts. It also increases your risk of injury. Instead, when your form starts to break down or your bar speed noticeably slows down, rack the bar.

That doesn’t mean you get to put the bar down just because you’re nervous or scared. If you think there’s a chance you have another rep, put your big-boy pants on and try it. As you gain experience, you’ll get better at knowing where your true limit is.

Taking assistance exercises like curls, LTEs, and lat-pulldowns to failure is fine and recommended. Not only do these movements work smaller muscle groups and cause less systemic stress, but they also use lighter weights and more repetitions than the primary lifts, so the high-threshold motor units you’re working (and trying to force to grow) don’t get recruited until the set approaches failure. If the goal is to apply stress to as much muscle mass as possible, you need to curl your little heart out until you can’t possibly squeeze out another rep.



More ways to make progress

The addition of rep ranges and back-off sets gives you four opportunities to make progress, declare victory over a workout, and walk out of the gym feeling good about your session. You can do any of the following:



Lift more weight in your top set.

Lift more weight in your back-off set.

Do more reps in your top set.

Do more reps in your back-off set.



In each scenario, you’ve improved upon your last performance.

The top set–back-off set approach keeps the workouts brief and concentrates your mental focus on tackling one hard thing at a time. Psych yourself up for one heavy set. Give it your best shot. Push yourself as hard as you can. Then bang out a back-off set and move on. One way or another, try to beat what you did last time.



Autoregulation

As the weights get heavier, you may notice a unique pattern emerging. One week, you’ll have little trouble completing all the reps of your top set. The next week, however, everything will feel harder than expected, and you’ll struggle to get within the target rep range. But then a week later, you’ll get all the reps with surprising ease. This pattern of “bad” weeks following “good” weeks is quite common and provides a useful example of the interplay between stress and recovery.

Squatting and deadlifting heavy weights puts a lot of stress on your body—so much stress that you may not be fully recovered by the time your next session rolls around. You had seven days of rest, but perhaps your body needed a few more days (such is the limitation of a training schedule based on the calendar rather than on your physiology). In this under-recovered state, you’ll likely see a decrease in your performance and you may not be able to complete as many reps as you did at your last session. While that may be frustrating in the moment, don’t be discouraged. Instead, understand that with fewer reps performed, the total amount of stress applied is less than the previous week, making it more likely that you’ll be fully recovered and see a boost in performance at the next workout. In other words, the good workouts often lead to bad workouts, and the bad workouts lead to good workouts.

A training program that accounts for these normal fluctuations in stress and recovery is using a form of “autoregulation,” which simply means training to the best of your ability on any given day and letting the stress of each workout accumulate and dissipate naturally over time. Autoregulation is a useful tool for stress management during the intermediate phase and beyond, and it’s elegantly built into your radically simple program.

All this is to say that as you progress through the intermediate and advanced phases of your training, you should be less concerned with your performance at an individual workout and more interested in the bigger picture. If your progress is trending upward over weeks or months, your program is working despite a few subpar workouts here and there.



Intermediate assistance exercises

The intermediate program features a variety of assistance exercises designed to improve your performance in the primary lifts and further enhance the look of your physique. Some of these movements are brand new, while others have been carried over from the novice template. Let’s briefly look at how each assistance exercise fits into the intermediate program.



Using lighter weights in the primary lifts

One of the unique features of Template B is the use of the main barbell lifts, at lighter weights, as assistance exercises. In Workout B, for example, heavy squats are followed by three sets of deadlifts using a load that is lighter than the top-set weight used in Workout D. Similarly, in Workout C, presses are followed by a few sets of bench presses performed with less weight (but for more reps) than in Workout A.

This arrangement is particularly useful if, like me, you prefer to spread the four workouts in Template B over a three-day schedule. In this setup, the primary barbell exercises are performed with heavy weights once every ten days. Sprinkling in lighter reps of each lift throughout the week will help keep the movement pattern fresh between heavy training sessions and give you the opportunity to practice good technique with slightly reduced loads.

Note that the set and rep structure for the light upper-body lifts differs from the structure for the lower-body lifts. Because presses and bench presses do not produce the kind of systemic stress that squats and deadlifts do, they can usually be taken to near failure without interfering with your recovery. Light squats and deadlifts, on the other hand, are capped at sets of five reps to reduce the likelihood that you will exceed your ability to recover from the workout and subsequently derail your progress.



Chin-ups and lat-pulldowns

By this point, many of you will be able to complete 10 bodyweight chin-ups and should start adding weight by using a dipping belt. Choose a weight that allows you to complete 8–10 reps in your top set. When you can do 10 reps, add a little more weight. The back-off set should be done with just your bodyweight for as many reps as possible.

If you’re still working towards completing 10 bodyweight reps, that’s okay. After you complete your top set, you can strap a rubber resistance band around the chin-up bar to assist you on the back-off set. Use a band that allows you to complete at least 8–10 reps. When you can do 10 reps in your back-off set, drop down to a thinner band.

Finally, if you’re unable to do at least five bodyweight chin-ups, you should stick with lat-pulldowns. Again, do your top set with a weight that allows you to complete 8–10 reps with near-perfect form. Then rest two to three minutes, back the weight down to 85%, and do one more set for as many reps as possible.



Rows

One of the new assistance exercises in the intermediate template is rows. Rows work the muscles of the back in a slightly different movement pattern than chin-ups and lat-pulldowns and help build a thicker, tapered upper body.

There are a lot of options for rows, like barbell rows, dumbbell rows, cable rows, machine rows, T-bar rows, seal rows, lever rows, and more. Frankly, I don’t care which one you pick, but I do have some recommendations based on years of coaching this stuff.

Since you have access to a barbell, barbell rows are the obvious choice. But be warned: barbell rows are very hard to do correctly. The focus of any rowing movement is to stress the muscles of your back (i.e., lats, traps, rhomboids, and posterior deltoids), but often trainees end up using everything except their back muscles to perform barbell rows. They pull with their biceps and forearms, drive with their legs, and extend their hips, using momentum to cheat the weight up. The exercise ends up being quite taxing on their already fatigued lower back and legs, and it doesn’t contribute much to the development of their back musculature. If you choose to include barbell rows, make sure the weight is light enough to allow for good technique. A video demonstration of barbell rows can be found at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources.

Dumbbell rows use a more stable position on a flat bench, thereby reducing the tendency to use momentum. However, since saving time in the gym is one of the goals in this program, and unilateral exercises take twice as long to work each side separately, I tend to avoid recommending them. If time isn’t a concern, however, feel free to experiment with dumbbell rows.

My favorite bilateral rowing exercises are seated cable rows, T-bar rows, and lever rows. Cable rows require a machine, like the one used for lat-pulldowns, that allows you to pull horizontally instead of vertically. Many lat-pulldown machines do both. T-bar rows and lever rows both use a plate-loaded apparatus, but the latter has the advantage of including a chest support that eliminates the stress on the lower back and reduces the tendency to cheat the movement with excessive knee and hip extension.

For all rowing movements, you want to use a grip or attachment that places your hands at about shoulder width, allowing you to pull your elbows past your ribs. You should avoid the popular V-shaped row handle that keeps your hands close together. This narrow grip reduces the range of motion and diminishes the effectiveness of the exercise.

Any horizontal rowing movement will work for this program. Pick one of the options above, try it for a few sessions, and see how you like it. Remember to use a weight light enough to allow for strict technique.





Lateral raises

One of the biggest gaps I’ve noticed in training programs that use only basic barbell exercises (squats, presses, and deadlifts) is the lack of shoulder development. In my training career, I got my barbell press to over 200 pounds for a set of five reps, but my deltoids never looked all that impressive. It wasn’t until I added lateral raises that they started to really pop.

Lateral raises round out the shoulders and help create a wider physique, but they don’t contribute much to your overall strength development and should not be considered an essential exercise. In other words, if you have access to dumbbells or a cable machine or functional trainer, do them, but don’t sweat it if you don’t.

Start with a weight that allows you to perform about 10–15 reps with perfect form. Fifteen to 25 pounds is a good place to start for most trainees. Rest two to three minutes and repeat for a total of two to three sets.

It’s very easy to do lateral raises with excessive swinging, which takes the stress off the deltoids. Always stick with light weights and use perfect form. (Visit https://www.hornstrength.com/resources for a video demonstration.)



Progressing in the assistance exercises

Just like the primary lifts, the assistance exercises in the intermediate template (except for lateral raises, light squats, and light deadlifts) use the top set–back-off set structure. Drive the reps up in each workout until you reach the top end of the rep range, and then add some weight at the next session. Remember to progress in both sets independently.

Lateral raises are done for two to three sets using the same weight. When you can complete all 15 reps in the first set and at least 10 reps in the subsequent sets, increase the weight at the next workout.

Light squats and deadlifts are done for three sets of five reps with 85% of the top-set weight used on the heavier day. Therefore, you will increase the weights on these lighter days only when the top-set weight of the heavier day increases.



Rotating assistance and light exercises

After following the intermediate program as written for a month or two, you may decide to switch up some of the assistance exercises. There’s nothing wrong with sticking to the lifts listed in the templates, but introducing some new movements can help you address specific weak points with the primary barbell exercises, further develop a lagging muscle group, or add some novelty to an otherwise repetitive (albeit effective) routine.

I recommend sticking with each exercise for six to twelve weeks and then rotating in a new variation that targets the same muscle group (i.e., pecs, quads, hamstrings, deltoids, lats, biceps, triceps). For example, you might work on barbell curls for a few months, driving up the weight as much as possible during that time, and then switch to incline dumbbell curls. Similarly, light presses could be replaced with seated dumbbell presses, weighted dips could take the place of light bench presses, trap-bar deadlifts could substitute for light deadlifts, and squats with a safety squat bar could take the place of light barbell squats.

Assistance exercise selection is the one area where I’m comfortable letting you venture into the bowels of the internet for inspiration. There are countless exercise variations using dumbbells, machines, specialty bars, and cables for you to experiment with. Some are great. Some are garbage. Don’t overthink this. Just pick a movement that looks appealing, get it stronger for a few weeks, then switch it up. The variety will expose you to different types of stress and make your workouts a little more interesting. Over time, you’ll find out which exercises you like, which ones you dislike, and which ones seem to have the biggest impact on your training and physique.

The key to making assistance exercises as productive as possible is to always employ pristine technique. These movements are easy to cheat by using momentum and recruiting other muscles (i.e., not the ones you’re trying to work) to move the load. Your form is far more important than how much weight you’re lifting. And as I mentioned earlier, unlike your squat and deadlift numbers, which can earn you bragging rights, no one cares how much you can curl. Leave your ego out of it and use perfect form.

If you’re following Template B and choose to incorporate different exercises than the light variations of the primary barbell lifts, you can follow the same set and rep structure, but you’ll need to adjust the load. The percentage listed for the lighter day (85%) is based on the top-set weight of the same exercise on the heavier day. If you swap light bench presses for dumbbell bench presses, for example, using 85% of the former won’t be applicable since the latter is a completely different movement.

You’ll have to experiment with each new assistance exercise until you find an appropriate weight to use. For upper-body variations, you’re looking for a top-set weight that allows you to complete five to eight reps with good form and progress from there. For lower-body alternatives—where the primary goal is to prevent de-training, not to add more total stress—you’ll want to select a weight that lets you complete five reps in each set with two to three reps left in the tank.

Finally, remember that for exercises that use lighter weights and more repetitions (i.e., the upper-body assistance exercises), maximum motor-unit recruitment doesn’t occur until you approach failure. If hypertrophy is the goal, be sure to perform all sets of whatever assistance exercises you choose, up to the point where you physically cannot complete another rep with good form.





STALLING, REGRESSING, AND ENDING THE INTERMEDIATE PROGRAM


Given that you have four ways to demonstrate some kind of improvement at each workout, you should be able to make steady progress with the intermediate template for quite a while before things slow down. Eventually, however, some of the exercises will begin to either stall or regress.

Stalling in the intermediate phase means you are stuck at the same weight and number of reps in both the top set and the back-off set for two or three consecutive workouts—no progress is being made. Regressing, on the other hand, means your performance in the top set is declining, and you are completing fewer reps each session—you’re getting weaker. Though both situations can be frustrating, there are some useful changes you can make to your program that will help you get back on track.



Stalling

Getting stuck at the same weight for several weeks is usually an indicator of insufficient stress. Restoring progress, therefore, may be as simple as adding a second (or even a third) back-off set. So, for example, if your squat has been stuck at 315 × 4 in your top set and 270 × 7 in your back-off set for two or three workouts in a row, try adding another back-off set with 270 pounds. The additional set should provide some extra stress to help you break through the plateau at subsequent workouts.

Alternatively, you can increase your weekly volume by adding another training day. If you’re following the two-day schedule, for example, with workouts on Monday and Thursday, try switching to the four-day template. With more frequent exposure to each lift, you’ll likely see an increase in performance.

As you advance through your training career, your body will inevitably adapt to whatever stress you subject it to (provided recovery is sufficient). Employing simple strategies that increase your total training volume, like adding more back-off sets or squeezing in extra training days, can help you unstick your lifts, restore your progress, and continue building strength and size for years to come.



Regressing

Regressing is different from stalling and usually indicates insufficient recovery. Adding more stress is likely to make things worse. Instead, when the number of reps you’re able to complete starts declining or drops below the bottom of the target rep range for two or three sessions, you can perform a simple reset by reducing the weight of your top set by 10% and progressing back up from there. You’ll also want to recalibrate the back-off set to 85% of the top-set weight.

A reset during the intermediate phase is particularly useful when your goal changes from building muscle to reducing body fat. Fat loss requires a reduction in caloric intake, and when less energy is available, you shouldn’t expect to put more weight on the bar every time you train. Sometimes the best you can do is lift as heavy as possible with good technique so you send a clear message to your body to hang on to your muscle mass while you get leaner. Even maintaining your strength and doing what you can to fight entropy as you lose weight is still progress.



Ending the intermediate phase

As with the novice program, you shouldn’t reset your weights more than one or two times during the intermediate phase. Beyond that, a reset is often a waste of time—you’ll just end up getting stuck at the same place and lose several weeks of potentially productive training. Instead, after you’ve reset and worked your way back up to the point at which you’re consistently stalling or regressing in your top set, particularly in the squat, it’s best to end the intermediate phase and move on.

Most of you won’t need anything more complicated than the intermediate templates. Life has a way of derailing your progress. Illness, travel, injuries, jury duty, etc., can all interrupt your training schedule. (Instructions for dealing with long breaks are covered in the appendix.) Any time you’re out of the gym for a week or more, you’ll typically need to back off the weights a bit and restart the process, which means that most average dudes will spend the majority of their training career in the intermediate phase. But for those of you able to train with enough consistency to exhaust the usefulness of the intermediate program, the advanced template provides an opportunity to break through sticking points, push to new levels of strength, and build an even more badass body.





CHAPTER 9





THE ADVANCED PROGRAM





With the novice and intermediate phases behind you, the easy gains are gone. Unfortunately, you can’t just slap 5 more pounds on the bar every time you train forever. As you inch closer to the limits of your genetic potential for building strength and size, progress slows, and programming gets necessarily more complex.

This change happens for two reasons: 1) it’s no longer possible to generate enough stress in a single workout to force your body to adapt and grow; and 2) with more stress required, you need more time to recover. It’s at this point that you’ll begin to spread out the work and cycle your training over several weeks, with each week serving a different purpose.

Up to now, the two main training variables you can manipulate—volume (how many sets and reps you’re doing) and intensity (how much weight you’re lifting)—were mostly tied together in the same workout because they could be. As a beginner, you’re capable of adding weight to the bar every time, so there’s no need to make things any more complicated by separating the two variables. But as you get stronger, volume and intensity need to be prioritized at different workouts so you can better manage the relationship between stress and recovery.

Think of volume as the thermostat in your oven, and intensity as the internal temperature of a big hunk of meat you’re trying to cook. If you want the meat to eventually reach an internal temperature of 135 degrees, you set your oven to, say, 325 degrees and leave the meat in there for an hour or so. The job of the thermostat is to regulate the temperature inside the oven by turning the heat on and off, maintaining a steady 325 degrees. Without enough heat, the meat won’t cook, but with too much heat, it’ll burn.

In the same way, volume is used to drive intensity in your training. The volume provides the stress (or heat) that causes the adaptation in strength and allows you to lift weights at higher intensities. If you don’t provide enough volume, you won’t get stronger. But if you overdo it on the volume, you won’t be able to recover adequately, and you’ll burn out. Knowing how and when to manipulate volume up and down to drive intensity is the key to making progress and continuing to get stronger throughout your lifting career.

With longer training cycles, the goal is to accumulate a bunch of stress with moderately heavy, manageable weights, then back off a bit to allow your body to recover from the stress and adapt, resulting in a measurable improvement in performance at higher intensities at the end of the cycle. Then the process repeats.

Remember, the key to making higher-volume, moderate-intensity workouts effective is to take the sets very close to failure. Just adding more volume isn’t enough. Regardless of the intensity (or weight) used, a high degree of effort is required to kick off the physiological processes that signal growth and tell your body to build new muscle tissue.

With these concepts in mind, look at the advanced program templates, and then see the important details that follow to understand how it works.



The advanced program consists of a three-week cycle that starts with higher-rep sets in Week 1 and then tapers down in Weeks 2 and 3.





Week 2 of the advanced program uses sets of three to five reps for the top set.





The final week in the advanced program cycle uses sets of one to three reps for the top set. After Week 3, the cycle repeats.





PROGRAM DETAILS


Introducing the three-week cycle

Before I say anything else, I must credit Starting Strength Coach and co-author of Practical Programming for Strength Training Andy Baker for introducing me to this arrangement of the three-week cycle. It is my go-to programming choice for advanced lifters and continues to produce fantastic results.

As you can see from the program template, this new approach consists of a three-week training cycle. In Week 1 (higher volume, lower intensity), you’ll work up to a top set of five to eight reps. In Week 2 (moderate volume, moderate intensity), you’ll cut back to a top set of three to five reps. And finally, in Week 3 (lower volume, higher intensity), you’ll work up to a heavy top set of just one to three reps. Then you’ll return to Week 1 and start the cycle again.

Week 1 provides the bulk of the stress. Week 2 is a transition week that allows for some recovery with a reduction in overall volume. Week 3 is where you test to determine whether the stimulus from the previous two weeks was enough to drive the desired adaptation and produce an improvement in peak performance.



Determining your starting weights

To find your starting weights for the top set of each week in the advanced cycle, refer to your recent training data. Find the weight and number of reps you were able to complete in the top set of your last intermediate workout. Then, use the following table to calculate your top-set weight for Week 1 of the advanced program.



The top-set weight for Week 1 is based on your previous performance.



With your starting weights for Week 1, you can calculate the top set for the remaining weeks of the advanced cycle by simply adding 5% to each week (weight × 1.05). Week 2 will be 5% heavier than Week 1, and Week 3 will be 5% heavier than Week 2. Here’s an example of a lifter who was able to complete four reps in his top set of squats with 320 pounds at his last intermediate workout.



Once you calculate your top-set weights for Week 1, you can determine the remaining weeks in the cycle.





Progressing in the advanced program

The good news is that you need to do the math only once. As you run through the cycle, you’ll progress in each rep range just as you did before, repeating the same weight and driving up the reps until you reach the top of the rep range, then increasing the weight a small amount at the next session (5 pounds for squat and deadlift and 2.5 pounds for bench and press).

Each week progresses independently of the others, and only if you complete all the reps in the range. So if you press 185 × 8 in Week 1, you will try 187.5 the next time Week 1 rolls around. If you’re able to do only 185 × 6 in Week 1, you’ll repeat the same weight and try to get all eight reps the next time week one comes up in the cycle. Weeks 2 and 3 will progress in the same way. Here’s an example of how the bench press might progress over three cycles through the advanced template:



Three cycles of the bench press in the advanced template.



The percentage you use to calculate the top-set weight for the first cycle should constitute a bit of a reset, which you’ll appreciate after coming off the inevitable grind at the end of the intermediate program. For the first few cycles, you should be able to get close to the top end of each rep range. If, when you begin the advanced program, you’re barely getting the minimum number of reps, or you’re falling below the bottom of the target range, you started too heavy, and you should back off 5–20 pounds and start again.



Advanced assistance exercises

As with the intermediate program, the light day and assistance lifts listed in the advanced templates can be periodically rotated with different exercises that work similar muscle groups. This is your opportunity to customize your workouts and add movements that drive progress in the main lifts or address weak points in your physique. In my own training, for example, I’ve found that substituting incline dumbbell presses for light barbell presses greatly improved my overall chest development, while sticking with light deadlifts did a better job of driving up my deadlift strength than any other variation of the exercise. Experiment with different assistance exercises and use the ones that work best for your goals.





STALLING AND REGRESSING IN THE ADVANCED PROGRAM


As with the intermediate program, you have several ways to make progress at each workout by increasing the weight or the reps in your top set and/or back-off set. Throwing a few more pounds on the bar or completing an additional rep constitutes a measurable improvement.

As with any program, however, in some of the weeks in the cycle, you will eventually stall (stop making progress) or regress (see a decline in performance). When either problem occurs for at least two consecutive cycles, there are a few tactics you can try.



Stalling

Recall the way the advanced program is set up: most of the volume (or stress) is generated in Week 1, then reduced in Week 2 to allow the body to recover so that hopefully, you can drive up the intensity (i.e., lift more weight) in Week 3. If you’ve failed to make any progress on one or more of the primary exercises in a given week of the cycle, particularly in Week 3, the problem may be a lack of volume. The solution to get you unstuck, therefore, is to add more volume using one of the methods.



Add another back-off set

The simplest way to add extra volume to your program is to do one or more additional back-off sets in Week 1. Perform your top set, then do your normal back-off set at 85%, and then do one or two more back-off sets. The extra sets can be done at the same weight, or if you’re struggling to get within the target rep range in the first back-off set, you can reduce the weight of the subsequent sets by another 5%–10%.

Don’t change anything in Weeks 2 or 3. See if the slight increase in volume in Week 1 is enough to restore progress at the end of the cycle.

The drawback to adding extra sets is that it increases the total length of your workout. For that reason, I like to use this option only if one or two lifts in the program are stalling. If you’re getting stuck on multiple exercises, there’s a better approach.



Repeat higher-volume weeks

Another way to increase the stress when progress is consistently stalling is to repeat the higher-volume weeks in the cycle before tapering down. Here’s an example:



Repeat higher-volume weeks if you stall.



In the example above, after failing to improve upon your performance in Week 3 of the first cycle, you can try repeating Week 1 a second time in the next cycle—adding another week of higher-volume training that will hopefully provide the necessary stress to help you break through a plateau in Week 3.

As you advance through your training career, you can use this method of repeating higher-volume weeks to continually increase the total stress of the program when progress stalls. Take a look at the following table to see examples of how to construct longer training cycles:



Examples of longer training cycles.



Remember, each week of the cycle progresses independently, so if you hit all your reps in Week 1, add some weight the next time Week 1 shows up. If you don’t make it to the top end of the rep range, repeat the weight and try to increase the number of reps you’re able to complete. As a general rule, the difference in load between the last week of one rep range and the first week of the next rep range will be about 5%. Here’s a sample progression through two six-week cycles:



Sample progression using a six-week cycle.



Using this method, you can add weeks as they become necessary. When the initial three-week cycle stops producing results, move to the four-week cycle. When that’s no longer enough stress to spur progress, try the six-week cycle and so on.

As a practical matter, I don’t recommend making cycles longer than eight weeks. It’s unlikely that you’ll have more than two months of uninterrupted training. Life tends to throw you a scheduling curveball every now and then, and since each week builds upon the next, you don’t want to waste your time and effort accumulating volume in the early weeks with no payoff at the end of the cycle because you weren’t able to get to the gym for a few days.



Regressing

Regressing requires a different tactic than stalling does. If you’re stuck at the same weight for several weeks, you can add volume in the ways we just discussed. However, if your performance starts to consistently decline—meaning you’re regressing in the number of reps you can complete—you probably need to back off the volume and/or intensity a bit to allow for some additional recovery to occur. There are two simple ways to do this: schedule a de-load week and reset the intensity.



Schedule a de-load week

A “de-load” is a short period of lower-volume, moderate-to-high-intensity training designed to allow some of the stress accumulated during your normal training cycle to dissipate. Think of it as a one-week break from your regularly scheduled program.

Excessive volume (rather than intensity) can beat up a lifter over time. The idea with a de-load, therefore, is to keep the intensity relatively high while reducing the overall training volume.

In the following de-load template, you’ll see that each main lift (except for the deadlift) is performed for only two sets of three reps, and all the assistance exercises have been eliminated.



In this de-load template, each main lift (except for the deadlift) is performed for only two sets of three reps, and all assistance exercises have been removed.



The top-set weight for each exercise in the de-load week is 10% less than the top-set weight used in Week 1 of the advanced cycle. Keeping the intensity close to what you’d use in your normal training will help maintain your neuromuscular efficiency (your body’s ability to recruit the high-threshold motor units needed to lift heavy weights) and prevent possibly de-training the movement pattern.

A de-load week should be inserted into the advanced training program at the end of Week 3, before you start the cycle over again. You can use de-load weeks as needed when it becomes clear that your strength is regressing. Or you can schedule a de-load week at the end of a certain number of training cycles as a preventative measure. In the latter case, you could plan a de-load at the end of three or four cycles through the three- or four-week training template or every one or two cycles through the six- or eight-week template.

De-loads aren’t always necessary since, again, life can get in the way of your normal training schedule. Any interruption that keeps you out of the gym for a week or more can be considered a type of de-load, in which case, further de-loading may be counterproductive. You’ll know that a de-load worked if you see an improvement in performance when you return to your regular training schedule.



Reset the intensity

Another strategy you can use to deal with a consistent, measurable regression in strength on a particular lift is to reset the weights of your top set and your back-off set. As with the novice and intermediate programs, to perform a reset, simply subtract 5%–10% from the top set of the problematic week and continue with the program. If the other weeks in the cycle are still progressing, don’t reset them.

Resets are most useful when calories are restricted during periods of focused fat loss. A reduction in body fat typically comes with a small amount of muscle loss—muscle you were using to lift heavy weights. While a decrease in performance can be frustrating, realize that your priority has changed, and the more important gauge of progress is the weight on the bathroom scale, not the weight on the bar. Reducing the intensity of an exercise that is regressing by performing a reset can provide a welcomed psychological break from the constant grind of pushing weights near the limit of your capabilities. When you switch back to a muscle-building phase and increase your caloric intake, you’ll likely work back up to your pre-reset weights and beyond.





YOUR TRAINING IS COMPLETE


Your programming journey started with a simple novice workout template and evolved into a multi-week advanced training cycle. Though each program may appear more complex than its predecessor, the guiding principles are the same: apply a measurable stress to the body, allow sufficient time for recovery and adaptation, then try to increase the stress. The stronger you get, the more stress you can generate at each training session, and the longer the stress-recovery-adaptation cycle needs to be to continue producing results.

Collectively, the novice, intermediate, and advanced programs provide a comprehensive, flexible system for organizing your training and making efficient use of your time in the gym throughout your training career. You don’t need anything more complicated than these radically simple templates to build a strong, lean, muscular physique.

But how you arrange variables like exercises, sets, and reps is only part of the fitness puzzle. Each training template can be used effectively whether you’re trying to build muscle and increase strength or lose body fat. The results these programs produce will depend on how you pair your training with a well-designed nutrition plan that supports each goal. So it’s time to get out of the gym, venture into the kitchen, and start dialing in your diet.





CHAPTER 10





RADICALLY SIMPLE NUTRITION





Here’s the cold hard truth: you will never look the way you want to look unless you learn how to eat with purpose. Even the most brilliantly designed training program won’t do a damn thing if you aren’t consuming enough of the right foods in the right amounts to create the conditions necessary to build muscle or burn fat.

Nutrition is where most dudes blow it, and it’s understandable. When it seems like everyone with a gym membership and a social media profile has an opinion on the optimal diet for peak human performance, just trying to figure out what to put in your mouth is enough to make your head spin and leave you with more questions than answers. Moreover, unlike your training program—in which you can make good progress by spending only a few hours in the gym each week—eating enough to build muscle and recover from your workouts requires several feedings per day. Adhering to whatever diet strategy you finally settle on, therefore, demands constant commitment and daily discipline.

Fortunately, like your approach to training, solving the diet puzzle need not be a complicated ordeal. The next few chapters provide a crash course in proper nutrition and outline a few specific recipes you’ll use to construct a radically simple, flexible meal plan that supports the different phases and goals of your journey to a better body.





A BRIEF NUTRITION PRIMER


Here are the key points to understand about nutrition:

Most of the foods you eat fall into one of three categories of macronutrients (a.k.a. “macros”): protein, carbohydrates, and fat.

Protein builds and preserves your muscle mass.

Carbohydrates and fat provide energy to fuel your workouts and recovery.

The total number of calories you consume from the combination of protein, carbs, and fat determines whether you are in a caloric surplus, in a caloric deficit, or at maintenance.

To maintain your current weight, you need to eat a certain number of calories each day (this number is highly variable, but everyone has a number).

A caloric surplus (eating more calories than maintenance) is needed to build muscle mass.

A caloric deficit (eating fewer calories than maintenance) is required to lose body fat.



That’s an abbreviated explanation, but trust me, it’s everything you need to know to start putting together a solid diet plan. You can ignore the bros, bio-hackers, and fitness influencers barking about meal timing, expensive supplements, fasting, detoxing, “doing keto,” putting butter in your coffee, eating only meat, eating no meat, all that. Ninety-nine percent of your success will come from just understanding these basic ideas.





WHAT TO EAT


Most fitness books approach nutrition like a series of math problems, relying on complex equations to calculate how many calories your body burns in a day based on your sex, weight, height, age, and activity level. Then, depending on your goal, you’re instructed to add or subtract a few hundred calories to create a surplus or deficit. From there, you subdivide the total calories using different percentages for protein, carbohydrates, and fat. Finally, you do more math to convert the allotted calories into grams and then devise a meal plan from an infinite number of food choices that perfectly hits your daily target for each macronutrient. It’s no wonder people find this nutrition stuff so confusing.

The first problem is that these equations are always wrong—they’re just estimates at best and often really bad ones. In the absence of expensive laboratory testing, the only way to know how many calories you should be consuming is to make an educated guess, eat that amount for a few weeks, observe what happens to your weight, and adjust accordingly.

The second problem is that deciding what to eat every day from an unlimited number of food options is damn near paralyzing. In my experience, telling a client to “Consume 200 grams of protein, 300 grams of carbohydrates, and 60 grams of fat from any combination of eggs, beef, poultry, milk, whey, cheese, pork, fish, yogurt, oats, bread, potatoes, rice, vegetables, fruits, nuts, oils, etc.” is usually met with a blank stare and a tepid nod. It turns out that people sometimes like to be told what to do, and I’ve had much better compliance from clients by being very specific about what I want them to eat.

So for this radically simple approach to nutrition, you can forgo the complicated calorie computations and just concern yourself with real food. And not just any food, but four basic meals you are going to cook and eat that cover your nutritional needs and can be easily adjusted as your strength and body-composition priorities change over time.





RADICALLY SIMPLE MEALS


Below you’ll find an overview of the meals you’ll be using throughout this program—all of which can be prepared in just a few minutes with inexpensive ingredients, limited equipment, and minimal cleanup. If you’re apprehensive about having to shop and meal-prep, don’t be. A shopping list, detailed cooking instructions, and links to video tutorials are included in the appendix and will guide you through every step of the process. As with all new endeavors, there is a bit of a learning curve, but I promise, once you make these meals for a week, the process will become painless.



Overnight Oats

For the uninitiated, the Overnight Oats recipe is basically oatmeal you don’t have to cook. When oats are soaked in some kind of liquid overnight, they soften up without the time and mess of preparing them on the stove. This recipe is spiked with whey protein, blueberries, chia seeds, and almond milk to pump you full of protein and provide useful carbs to fuel your training. It’s a healthy, delicious, no-cook meal that takes less than five minutes to prepare. Just store it in the fridge until you’re ready for breakfast, dessert, or a snack.

Overnight Oats are a great grab-and-go option if you don’t have a lot of time in the morning. Moreover, should you forget to prep them the night before, you can simply throw all the ingredients in a blender and whip up a quick and easy breakfast smoothie.



Prot-Meal and Eggs

If your schedule permits about ten minutes to cook, the combination of prot-meal (protein powder mixed with oatmeal) and eggs is a delicious, high-protein breakfast option. In one bowl, you’ll combine oatmeal, chocolate protein powder, blueberries, nut butter, and bananas. With it, you’ll have an egg-white omelet with low-calorie, sugar-free maple syrup. The combination of egg whites and syrup may sound unappealing (I was skeptical at first), but you’ll be pleasantly surprised.

While there is absolutely nothing wrong or unhealthy about eating whole eggs, I opt for egg whites for two reasons: 1) they come in convenient pint-sized containers you can pop open and pour directly into a pan—no need to make a mess cracking a bunch of eggshells on your countertop, and 2) they contain no fat and therefore have far fewer calories than whole eggs.

Choosing low-calorie foods that are also high in protein is essential during the fat-loss phase of the program when you must consistently reduce total energy intake to burn off body fat while still consuming enough protein to preserve muscle tissue. It’s difficult to create a substantial caloric deficit when you’re eating a lot of higher-fat foods like whole eggs.

Prot-Meal and Eggs is my daily, go-to breakfast, and I never tire of it. It’s sweet and satisfying, and it provides a great balance of macronutrients to get me through my day. I’m confident you’ll love it.



The Big Beef Bowl (The BBB)

Every young lifter, at some point in their training career, eventually stumbles upon the combination of ground beef and rice as a more palatable alternative to canned tuna, dry chicken breasts, and chalky protein drinks. While I certainly didn’t invent this classic bro-meal, I have spent years tweaking and refining my own humble recipe.

The Big Beef Bowl is a vessel of glorious nourishment that consists of a few staples like ground beef, rice, sweet potatoes, veggies, and seasoning. It’s loaded with protein, complex carbs, and fiber to power your workouts, keep you satiated, and give your body the resources it needs to grow.

If you have an aversion to red meat, you can substitute ground turkey or chicken. It won’t be quite as tasty or nutrient dense, but it’ll still get the job done.

Preparing several servings takes only minutes, it stores easily in the fridge or freezer, and it travels well. Just toss a bowl in the microwave when you’re ready to eat, and you’ll have a healthy, delicious, muscle-building meal.

As you’ll see in the next chapter, The BBB will make up a large part of your diet, with most trainees consuming two daily servings. Sometimes, however, getting both meals in won’t be possible (or desirable). You may have plans to eat at a restaurant or you may just feel like cooking something different from time to time. No problem. The “Recipes” section of the appendix includes a flexible template you can use to create alternatives to The BBB that share a similar caloric/macronutrient profile and won’t derail your diet.



The Radically Simple Protein Shake

Every good lifter needs a good protein shake. In fact, if you don’t have a couple of smelly shaker cups in your cupboard or the back of your car, can you really say you even lift, bro? As you get bigger and stronger and your calorie and protein demands increase, having a quality shake in your meal plan will help ensure that you’re consuming enough amino acids to pack on more muscle mass—particularly when you don’t feel like eating any more solid food.

The Radically Simple Protein Shake recipe was born out of a happy accident. I had started taking a daily dose of lemon-flavored liquid fish oil (a potent source of healthy omega-3 fatty acids proven to help improve cardiovascular health, reduce inflammation, lower the risk of heart disease, and much more), but found that swallowing a plain spoonful of the stuff was pretty gross. So to make it go down easier, I poured the fish oil into a blender along with some blueberries, chocolate–peanut butter protein powder, and vanilla almond milk. I expected this smoothie to taste terrible (like that time in college when I tried to make a tuna shake), but to my surprise, it tasted almost exactly like a popular kids’ cereal I was occasionally allowed to have when my mom was out of town. Fish fat and chocolate protein may sound like a questionable pairing, but it’s delicious and healthy, and I guarantee that you’ll look forward to it every day.





MINIMALIST MEAL PLANNING


That’s all there is to it—three simple meals and one protein shake are everything you need to create a solid nutrition plan. If the lack of variety sounds boring and restrictive, that’s the point. You want to put your diet on autopilot. The intentionally minimalist menu eliminates the need to waste any time or mental energy trying to decide what to eat. There’s no need to wander the aisles at the grocery store pondering what to cook for dinner. You’ll know exactly what to shop for and how to prepare it quickly and efficiently. With less opportunity for analysis-paralysis to undermine your efforts, you’ll be more likely to stick to your plan and reach your goals.

When it comes to both training and diet, variety is the enemy. The boring stuff is the stuff that works. If you’re constantly changing exercises or messing with different rep schemes in the gym, you have no idea what, if anything, is producing results. Similarly, if you’re always eating different stuff, it’s difficult to accurately assess your daily caloric intake or know how to tweak your diet when your weight plateaus. But as you’ll see in the coming chapters, by sticking to a limited menu and eating the same meals most of the time, making intelligent, impactful adjustments to your diet is a radically simple process.

Understand that if you want to change your body, you must change your relationship with food. The most successful trainees are the ones who have made the mental shift from viewing food as a source of enjoyment and pleasure to seeing it as fuel for their training and recovery and a means to producing a specific outcome. That doesn’t mean they don’t enjoy what they eat, but savoring every bite of food isn’t the priority; eating it (or not eating it) is. Once you shift your perspective on food from being a momentary indulgence to a tool for building strength, power, and self-confidence, you’ll start to find that ground beef, rice, and abs bring you more long-term satisfaction than do pizza, donuts, and flab.

That isn’t to say you need to eat this limited menu all the time—just most of the time. I’m not a sociopath, and I love a good donut or perfectly grilled steak as much as the next guy. That’s why planned “cheat meals” and full diet breaks (a.k.a. “refeeds”) are built into your nutrition program so you can eat the foods you love, enjoy social events with friends or family, and still stay on track with your diet.

But if what you’ve been doing hasn’t gotten you the body you want, then you need to try a different strategy—at least for a little while. Remember, your body doesn’t want to change, so if you’re going to force it to grow muscle or get rid of fat, more austere measures are required. Let food be boring. Let the results you see in the gym or the mirror be your main source of motivation.

Now that you understand the essential elements of proper nutrition and have a general idea of what to eat, all that’s left to figure out is the quantity of food you need to consume. In the next few chapters, you’ll learn how to put together a meal plan based on your current bodyweight and body composition that will work with both the muscle-building and fat-shedding phases of your training. And since most of you probably need to pack on a bunch of muscle before you have anything worth showing off, we’ll start there.





CHAPTER 11





EATING FOR SIZE AND STRENGTH





Your mission for the first few months of this program is simple—get bigger and stronger. Fortunately, if you focus on doing what is necessary to get stronger, getting bigger will take care of itself.

As we discussed earlier, bigger muscles produce more force than smaller ones. Bigger muscles are also heavier than smaller ones. So if your intention is to get stronger, your muscles need to get bigger, and if your muscles get bigger, they will weigh more, which usually means you will weigh more. Let me reiterate that very important point: if you want to become a big, strong dude, you will probably need to gain some amount of weight. How much weight depends on where you are when you start the process.





GAINING WEIGHT


Your initial body composition will determine how much weight you should try to gain during the first phase of your training. Leaner lifters need to gain more mass than their “fluffier” counterparts. Recall the category you identified with earlier in the book (see the table below).



Choose the category that most accurately describes your current body composition.



Again, do not overthink this. Trust your gut and pick the one you feel is most accurate. Next, note the bodyweight segment you fall into. If you’re between two segments, round to the nearest one.



Identify the bodyweight segment you are closest to.



Finally, see the instructions below for each of the three body-composition categories to understand your specific goal.



Category 1 (underweight): Gain 20 pounds

If you’re a Category 1 trainee, you will need to add a decent amount of bodyweight to maximize your gains in strength and size during the first phase of your training. A 20-pound increase over the course of the next four to six months (about 1 pound a week) is ideal.

For whatever bodyweight segment you fall into at the start of the program, your first goal is to move up to the next 20-pound increment. If you’re starting out below 160 pounds, then step one is to get your skinny ass up to that weight. If you’re already close to 180 pounds, then you’re shooting for 200 pounds.

Keep in mind that this plan is not an exact science, but rather a general guide for approximately how much bodyweight you should aim to add during your first gaining phase. Eating enough to create slow, steady weight gain will ensure that you have the resources you need to train hard and pack on lean muscle mass without adding an excessive amount of body fat.



Category 2 (average): Gain 10 pounds

Lifters in the second category don’t need to gain as much weight as their thinner, Category 1 counterparts since they should expect some recomposition (losing fat while gaining muscle) to occur. A good goal for Category 2 trainees is to gain about 10 pounds of total bodyweight over the course of the first four to six months (about half a pound per week). So if you’re a skinny/fat 190 pounds, for example, aim to move up to 200 pounds. Once you get there, you can reassess your goals based on your performance and appearance.



Category 3 (overweight): Maintain current weight

Category 3 lifters are starting off with a lot of excess body fat, so if you fall into this segment, your total weight doesn’t need to change much at all. That doesn’t mean you won’t be building muscle. You’ll also be able to recompose for a little while, with the net changes in total bodyweight adding up to essentially zero. You might gain or lose a pound or two, but it won’t be anything significant, so pick the bodyweight segment you’re closest to and try to hang out there. Practically speaking, you’ll know everything is working if you’re adding more weight to the bar at each workout and you can cinch your belt in a notch or two even though your clothes are getting tighter around the chest, arms, back, and thighs.





THE RADICALLY SIMPLE MEAL PLAN


What separates the diet approach in this book from all the other overly complicated nutrition guides on the market is the following table that details exactly what to eat based on your target weight. No thinking. No guessing. Just stick to the plan and you will succeed.



The recipe for The BBB renders two servings. The amount of rice listed in the meal plan is the total amount used when preparing both servings. Additionally, you can substitute The BBB for a meal of your own creation using the recipe template in the appendix.



As you can see, for each bodyweight segment, there is a corresponding meal plan. The meals are the same; only the quantity of certain ingredients and the number of servings change (specific instructions for each segment are covered in the “Recipes” section of the appendix). The idea is to build the habit of eating a few basic meals every day, and then make small adjustments as needed to reach your goals.

To determine your initial meal plan, identify the row you fall into based on your current bodyweight. If you’re between two rows, round to the nearest one. If you’re a Category 3 lifter, round down.

Start by following the diet in your designated row. If, for example, you’re a 160-pound, Category 1 (underweight) dude with the goal of gaining about 20 pounds during the first run through the program, you’ll follow the meal plan detailed in the 160–180-pound row. Over the course of a day, you’ll eat one of the two breakfast options (Overnight Oats or Prot-Meal and Eggs), two servings of The Big Beef Bowl made with half a cup of rice (divided into each serving), and one protein shake. As long as you’re slowly gaining weight, stick with that meal plan.

If you’re a Category 2 (average) lifter starting at 215 pounds, your goal is to gain about 10 pounds. You’ll begin the program by eating all the food listed in the 200–220-pound row—one of the two breakfast options, two servings of The BBB made with one cup of rice, one protein shake, and one extra scoop of whey mixed with water.

Finally, if you’re a Category 3 (overweight) trainee starting off at 250 pounds, your goal is to maintain your weight and hopefully swap out some of that fat for muscle in the process. You’ll follow the meal plan in the 240–260-pound row, eating one serving of breakfast, two BBB servings made with one and a half cups of rice, and two protein shakes. If your weight remains unchanged for a few weeks, you’ll know it’s the right amount of food.





TRACKING YOUR PROGRESS AND ADJUSTING YOUR DIET


Evaluating your progress on this program means paying attention to two numbers: 1) the weight on the bar, and 2) the weight on you. The former is fairly objective. If you’re able to keep adding weight to the barbell on a regular basis, you’re getting stronger. The latter requires you to track your bodyweight, which means you’ll need to weigh yourself often.

As we discussed earlier, step on the scale first thing in the morning, naked, after you pee. Take the average of three or more readings at the end of the week and compare it to the previous week. If your weight is doing what it’s supposed to do based on your goal (increasing half a pound to a pound or holding steady), stick to your current meal plan. If your weight isn’t moving in the direction it should be after two consecutive weeks, you’ll need to increase the amount of food you’re eating each day.

To adjust your diet, simply move down to the next target-weight row in the table. Each row adds a few hundred calories to your daily intake in the form of some extra rice, nut butter, or an additional protein shake. This change should be enough to get the scale moving again.

It doesn’t get any simpler than this. Increasing (and eventually decreasing) your food intake requires you only to make a small change to what you’re already eating each day, so you don’t have to dream up new recipes whenever your weight plateaus—just pick a new row and you’re good to go.

Everyone’s metabolism is different, so each meal plan is just a starting point. Some trainees will need significantly more calories to drive up their bodyweight. It’s entirely possible, for example, that a 180-pound trainee will eventually need to follow the 200–220-pound or even the 240–260-pound meal plan to keep adding mass. So be it. Just stick with each row until it stops producing results, then move to the next row.

In the rare case that a trainee is unable to gain any more weight following the 240–260-pound meal plan, further increases in total caloric intake can be made by bumping up the amount of rice in The BBB by half a cup at a time, adding a third protein shake, or even drinking a glass of whole milk with one or more meals. As always, start with one small adjustment, see what happens to your weight over the next two weeks, and then adjust again as needed.





PREPARING YOUR MEALS


Detailed recipes and cooking instructions are included in the appendix. On average, each meal will take between five and fifteen minutes to prepare. Overnight Oats and The BBB can be made daily, or you can prepare them in larger batches that produce several servings and keep them in the refrigerator or freezer. It’s up to you. Once you build the habit and perfect the process, you’ll find the right meal-prep schedule to fit your routine.





MEAL TIMING AND FREQUENCY


Many nutrition coaches advocate spreading your meals evenly throughout the day, while others will swear by not eating before noon and cramming all your food into one or two larger feeding sessions. Though some research suggests that eating every three to four hours can help curtail cravings and maximize muscle-protein synthesis, it doesn’t matter much—just make sure you eat all the food you’re supposed to. Total caloric intake is the most important thing to get right, followed closely by what those calories are composed of (protein, carbs, and fats), but the latter is taken care of.

As long as you follow the meal plan for your target-weight category, you’ll be meeting your caloric and macronutrient needs. How you choose to divide those calories up throughout the day is entirely up to you. If you don’t like eating breakfast, for example, you can have your Overnight Oats for dessert. If you prefer to eat one big meal instead of two smaller ones, just combine two servings of The BBB into one. The menu is rigid, but the meal plan is flexible.

Most people will find that three meals with one or two shakes in between fits nicely into their daily routine, but again, the important thing is that you’re eating everything you’re supposed to eat each day.





EAT BIG TO GET BIG


For some of you, Category 1 (underweight) guys in particular, consuming enough food to build a substantial amount of new muscle tissue can be challenging. Bigger dudes have an advantage here since they clearly know how to eat. Category 1 guys are skinny primarily because of their genetics. They tend to have fast metabolisms and burn off a lot of calories instead of storing the excess.

In my powerlifting days, I could maintain my competitive bodyweight of 252 pounds with only 3,100 calories. At the same time, I was working with a young, 155-pound client who would start losing weight if he consumed less than 5,000 calories a day.

Nonetheless, there is an amount of food you can consume that will make you grow. It may be more than you’re comfortable eating at first. Do it anyway. It doesn’t matter that you aren’t hungry. I’m not telling you to enjoy your food. I’m telling you to eat it.

If you want to make a meaningful change in your strength and appearance, you’re going to have to embrace a little discomfort from time to time both in the gym and at the dinner table. Don’t sabotage all the hard work you’re doing under the barbell by undereating and not giving your body what it needs to build new muscle. You may have to force yourself to finish a few meals early in the program, but you will eventually develop a bigger appetite, and you’ll look forward to devouring your dinner. Commit to your meal plan and just eat.





TRAINING WHILE GAINING


This radically simple nutrition plan is designed to be used in conjunction with the training programs outlined in the previous chapters. As you work your way through the novice, intermediate, and advanced templates, follow the meal plan for your target bodyweight, adjusting along the way, until you reach your goal. As long as your strength is increasing and the scale is moving in the desired direction, rest assured that you’re making good progress towards becoming a bigger, stronger dude.

For most new trainees, your initial strength gains will begin to slow or stall at around the three-to-six-month mark. This slowdown usually coincides with the time it takes to reach your first bodyweight goal. At this point, you have two options: 1) continue trying to pack on more muscle mass, or 2) shift your focus from increasing strength and size to shedding excess body fat and uncovering your leaner, more muscular physique. To accomplish the former, keep eating and keep lifting. To switch to a fat-loss phase, keep reading.





CHAPTER 12





CUT THE FAT; KEEP THE MUSCLE





If the first phase of the program was about building new muscle mass, the second phase is all about being able to see it. After a few months of solid training, you’ll be a hell of a lot stronger and more muscular than when you started. And while you should be proud of what you’ve accomplished thus far, it’s likely that after a period of focused weight gain, you will be a little underwhelmed with the way you look.

When you made the decision to finally start getting in shape, you likely had grand visions of shredded six-pack abs and bulging biceps covered in sinewy veins. That you can pull a few hundred pounds off the floor and your T-shirts are tighter around the arms is all well and good, but when you stand naked in front of the bathroom mirror, you probably don’t see the chiseled Adonis you imagined. You’ve been busting your ass in the gym, prepping your meals, and shoveling food down your throat, but you’re not sure anyone can tell that you actually hit the gym on a regular basis. You may feel like you just got fatter.

This disappointment is all too common when a drug-free novice lifter reaches the end of their first few months of dedicated strength training. The root of the problem is that while you’ve undoubtedly added a fair amount of new muscle tissue to your frame, you’re still carrying around some body fat, which softens the look of your physique and blurs your muscle definition.

If you want to look jacked, cut, shredded, peeled, or whatever you want to call it, and actually see the results of your heavy lifting and diligent dieting, you need to get rid of as much body fat as possible while maintaining the muscle mass you’ve built. Recall from a previous chapter that your goal with fat loss is to get your body composition to about 10% fat—the point where most trainees will see some nice definition in their arms and abs. To reach this ideal level of leanness, you’ll need to do two things: 1) eat less food, and 2) keep lifting heavy.





EAT LESS FOOD


Any discussion of fat loss must center around diet. When improving your body composition is the primary goal, diet is the most important factor and training is secondary. How much body fat you’re carrying is determined almost entirely by your diet, and you cannot out-exercise a shitty diet no matter how much time you spend in the gym.

Losing body fat isn’t complicated. In fact, every fad diet you’ve ever read about works the exact same way: by creating a caloric deficit.

Keto and Atkins diets: Create a caloric deficit by reducing carbohydrate intake

Mediterranean diet: Creates a caloric deficit by eliminating refined carbohydrates, processed foods, and red meat

Intermittent fasting: Creates a caloric deficit by eliminating a meal and shortening the feeding window

Paleo diet: Creates a caloric deficit by eliminating high-calorie processed foods

Vegan diet: Creates a caloric deficit by eliminating all animal products

Low-fat diet: Creates a caloric deficit by reducing fat intake

Juice cleanse: Creates a caloric deficit by eliminating all foods except overpriced fruit juice



The proponents of these different diet strategies will claim there is something unique about their chosen approaches—that you can eat as much as you want of specific foods, never be hungry, and yet still manage to lose weight. While each of the aforementioned diets may work (for a brief period), if you are losing weight, you are, without exception, in a caloric deficit, whether or not it feels like you are.

Conversely, many people will claim they are in a caloric deficit but still unable to lose weight. Over the years, I’ve had countless clients swear to me that they’re eating less than 1,000 calories per day and don’t understand why their body fat isn’t melting away. Of course, after I’ve persuaded them to actually track everything they put into their mouths for a week, they’re shocked to discover that their daily caloric intake was significantly higher than they realized, often by more than 1,000 calories.

Tracking your calories is a lot like tracking your finances. If you’ve ever recorded every penny that came in and out of your checking account for a few months, you know it can be an eye-opening experience—for instance, you probably had no idea how much you spent on dining out with friends. The same is true with diet. When you track your food intake and discover exactly how many calories are in that tablespoon of peanut butter, for example, you quickly realize that your estimation was way off.

Fortunately, this book’s radically simple approach to nutrition eliminates the need to diligently log your food intake with apps and spreadsheets and makes the process of creating a steady caloric deficit essentially foolproof.





ADJUSTING YOUR MEAL PLAN FOR FAT LOSS


By this point in the process, you should have a fairly good idea of how much food you need to eat to maintain or increase your bodyweight. Your daily meal plan is a matter of routine. Cooking and eating the requisite food is just something you do. Sure, it’s a little boring and repetitive, but you’ve learned to be consistent. And because you’ve built the habit of eating roughly the same thing every day, losing fat isn’t going to be that difficult. You need only eat a bit less, and the meal plan table will help you figure out exactly how to adjust your diet to create a caloric deficit.



To reduce your calories, move up one row from your current meal plan.



First, identify the row and corresponding meal plan you’re currently following. Then, to reduce your daily caloric intake, simply move up one row to a lower target weight. That’s your new plan. Just eat all the food listed in that row, and you’ll be in a caloric deficit.

If, for example, you ended your gaining phase following the meal plan for 240–260 pounds, you’ll start your cutting phase with the 200–220-pound row. Stick with the new meal plan, and track your bodyweight with frequent weigh-ins. If and when you stop losing weight for two weeks (assuming you’ve been consistent with your diet), move to the 160–180-pound row, eat the recommended meals, and keep going. Each time you move up a row, you’ll create a bigger calorie deficit.

Throughout the program, you’ll use this same strategy of moving up or down a row to adjust your caloric intake depending on your goal (building muscle or losing fat). It’s really that simple if you stick to your diet, eat the foods you’re supposed to eat, and don’t cheat—well … don’t cheat too often.





CHEATERS CAN PROSPER


For even the most compliant and disciplined trainees, achieving impressively low levels of body fat will take several months. That’s a long time to expect someone to eat the same rather dull meals over and over. Fortunately, I don’t expect that at all. In fact, I want you to cheat on your diet often, but you have to do it strategically.

Restricting calories for long periods of time will likely lead to changes in hormone levels that affect hunger, nutrient partitioning (whether calories are burned or stored), and recovery. Leptin, thyroid hormone, and testosterone may decrease; cortisol (a stress hormone) can increase; and your overall metabolic rate may slow, making it more difficult to continue losing weight. Taking an occasional break from your diet will allow these hormones to return to their normal levels and allow your metabolic rate to rebound, resulting in more fat loss.

Psychologically, planned breaks from your diet can also boost your motivation and compliance by providing a little mental reprieve and giving you something to look forward to. Dieting, by definition, means you will be denying yourself things you’d like to eat. There are days you will feel hungry and deprived. It’s difficult to buckle down and stay disciplined for long, undefined periods of time. Telling yourself, “You can’t eat any donuts ever” is very different from saying, “You can’t eat donuts for three more days.” Breaking the diet into shorter, more manageable chunks will make the periods of disciplined abstinence less daunting and easier to sustain. Most people can buckle down for a couple of weeks but will struggle to find the willpower to give something up indefinitely. I mean, c’mon; donuts are fucking delicious.

Additionally, intentional breaks from your diet can be planned around social events, date nights, holidays, and vacations, giving you a sense of flexibility and control over your schedule, as well as the freedom to enjoy yourself and not feel as though you’re undermining all of your hard work.

Planned deviations from your diet come in two forms: free meals and refeeds.



Free meals

During a fat-loss phase, you may allow yourself one free meal each week, provided you stuck to your diet and actually made progress in the form of a measurable loss of bodyweight. A free meal is a scheduled and defined period of unrestricted, guilt-free eating. This is your opportunity to indulge. Eat anything and everything you’ve been craving. Order a pizza, wings, and some breadsticks. Grill yourself a couple of fatty ribeyes and polish off a bottle of wine. Go out for tacos and margaritas. Definitely order a few desserts. But there are two important caveats:

You get only one free meal per week. When you push away from the table or leave the restaurant, it’s back to business.

You have to earn it. You get to have a weekly free meal only if you’ve lost weight. If your average body weight isn’t lower than the previous week’s average, skip the free meal.



Most people will find that free meals are best saved for the weekend, when you can go out with your partner or buddies and not annoy them with your weird dietary restrictions. But again, you gotta earn it. If you were too lax with your meals during the week and your weight didn’t decrease, stick to your regular meal plan.

Free meals do wonders for curbing cravings and improving overall compliance. In fact, you’ll likely feel so satisfied after a night of excessive eating that you won’t want to cheat on your diet for at least a few days. During my most recent cutting phase, I took my free meals very seriously and stocked up on all kinds of junk food in preparation. Often, I was so disgusted with myself after gorging on Saturday night that my cravings subsided until Wednesday or Thursday of the following week.

For accurate bodyweight tracking, it’s best to avoid scheduling a weigh-in for the morning after a free meal. Carbs, alcohol, fat, sugar, and sodium intake can cause your body to retain extra water and temporarily skew your weight higher than it would be otherwise. For this reason, if you typically indulge on Saturday or Sunday night, you should do your final weekly weigh-in the morning of your intended free meal for a more accurate data point.

Don’t be alarmed when you step on the scale the morning after an aggressive free meal. I’ve had many occasions where I weighed in more than 10 pounds heavier than the previous day. That doesn’t mean I gained 10 pounds of fat in one night. Much of it was just water weight from the extra sodium and carbohydrates. If you get right back to your normal meal plan, you should be on track by the end of the following week.

Another benefit of a weekend free meal is that you’ll likely see a boost in performance at your next workout. Loading up on carbs and calories the night before heavy squats will fill up your glycogen stores and provide more energy to push through your sets.

One final note: Some trainees do better with a rigid diet strategy that does not allow for any cheating. It’s not that an occasional high-calorie meal is detrimental to their progress; it’s that once they start eating delicious, hyper-palatable foods, they can’t stop. When their brain gets a little hit of dopamine from the combination of sugar and fat, the cravings become overwhelming, and one free meal can quickly turn into an entire day of binging on junk food. You need a bit of self-awareness when you’re restricting calories. If you find that the addition of an occasional free meal is ultimately counterproductive to your long-term progress, leave it out. You’ll be better off.



Refeeds

Unlike the gaining phase of the program, which you ran uninterrupted until you were unable to add more weight to the bar or you reached your desired bodyweight goal, the fat-loss phase will pause after several weeks for a brief period of “refeeding.”

A refeed is five to seven days of maintenance-level caloric intake. The easiest way to do this is to move down one row in the meal plan table. If you’re losing weight following the 160–180-pound meal plan, for example, you’ll switch back to the 200–220-pound meal plan for a week and then return to the 160–180-pound row.

Refeeds are not free meals, and I’m not advocating that you binge on nachos and ice-cream sandwiches for a week. The goal is simply to take a short break from putting your body in a calorie-restricted state so it has an opportunity to restore the hormones responsible for regulating your appetite and metabolism to a more beneficial level.

The frequency with which you should implement a refeed is based on your body composition. Leaner trainees benefit from more frequent refeeds than those with higher body-fat percentages. As a general rule, if you’re over 20% body fat, you should incorporate a refeed about every twelve weeks, and if you’re under 15% body fat, plan to refeed every six to eight weeks.





FAT-LOSS MATH


There’s a simple calculation you can use to get an idea of how much body fat you need to lose to get down to 10%, but you need to know your initial body fat percentage. Use the exact number from a DEXA scan, or just estimate using a bathroom scale or the mirror.

The 10% Body-Fat Formula

(Bodyweight – (Bodyweight × Body-Fat Percentage)) / 0.9





First, subtract your body fat from your total bodyweight to calculate your lean body mass (LBM). Then divide your LBM by 0.9. The result will be what you should weigh at 10% body fat. The limitation of this calculation is that it assumes that all the weight lost will be fat, which is possible but unlikely. With any significant reduction in bodyweight, a small amount of muscle loss is to be expected, but it can be minimized if protein intake is kept high (another feature already built into this meal plan) and you continue lifting heavy weights on a regular basis. Still, this formula will give you a reasonable idea of what bodyweight to aim for as you cut. Consider the following example of a 200-pound lifter with 15% body fat.

(200 – (200 × 0.15)) / 0.9 = 189





The trainee in this example would need to cut down to 189 pounds to get to 10% body fat. Using this formula, you can calculate how much fat you need to lose and then set a realistic target date for reaching your goal. In this example, this 200-pound lifter has 11 pounds of fat to lose and should plan on reaching his goal of 10% body fat in about two to three months.





RATE OF REDUCTION


During a fat-loss phase, you should aim to lose 0.5 to 2 pounds of body fat each week. Beyond that, you’ll risk sacrificing some of your hard-earned muscle mass. The more body fat you’re carrying at the start of the process, the more aggressive you can be with your cut. The leaner you get, the more difficult and slower the process of losing more fat will be. Expect the first few pounds to come off quickly, but as you approach 10% body fat, you’ll be lucky to get half a pound of weight loss every one to two weeks. That’s okay. Progress, no matter how slow, is still progress.





EVALUATING FAT LOSS


The strength-focused, gaining phases of the program use plate and weight goals to gauge progress. Weight on the bar is a simple, tangible, concrete yardstick that tells you if you’re getting stronger and moving in the right direction. Tracking body composition is trickier—you can’t rely only on how much bodyweight you gain or lose because the scale doesn’t tell you what’s fat and what’s muscle.

Periodic DEXA scans can provide an accurate measurement of body composition, but they’re a little inconvenient and they’ll cost you. There are also some consumer-grade scales on the market that claim to measure body fat, but they are horribly inaccurate and will give you vastly different readings depending on the time of day, what you ate, how much water you drank, etc. So in the absence of expensive testing equipment, the best way to evaluate your progress during a fat-loss phase is to use a combination of visual cues and frequent weigh-ins.



Let your veins be the guide

Most fitness bros will tell you to look at your abs—the more defined they are, the leaner you’re getting. Keeping track of your waist measurement is also handy since a reduction in belly size would be a pretty good indicator of fat loss. But my preferred guide for judging leanness is to look at your vascularity—particularly in the arms.

The upper arm has several large, superficial veins (the cephalic vein, the brachial vein, and the basilic vein) that help cool the body by carrying blood closer to the surface of the skin. At certain levels of leanness, these veins are clearly visible in most people. The leaner you get, the more they pop out and thus serve as a good guidepost for gauging body composition.

For me, the cephalic vein in my left arm starts to show up when my body fat gets under about 15%. I can see it clearly in the middle of a workout when my arms are pumped full of blood and the lighting catches it just right. As I approach lower levels of leanness, I can see it all the time, even at complete rest. Unfortunately, the same vein in my right arm seems to be buried deeper below the skin. Even at my leanest, I’ve never seen the little guy, and it makes me sad (genetics are a bitch). Fortunately, I do have another small vein that pops up in my upper abdominal muscles when my body fast is below about 13%. When I can see both of these veins any time of the day, I know my body fat is about 10%.

From an aesthetic standpoint, arm veins don’t get the credit they deserve. They’re better than abs because you can see them all the time, even with a shirt on. Six-pack abs are like cool tattoos hidden under your clothes—they look awesome, but no one knows they’re there. With popping arm pipes, however, there’s no denying you’re a dude in great shape.

So I’m planting my flag: Screw abs! They’ve gotten too much attention for too long. Embrace the veins. Wherever yours show up, pay close attention and use them as a guide, along with waist measurements, scale measurements, photos, and the occasional DEXA scan to improve your ability to visually track your body composition.



Weigh yourself daily

During the fat-loss phases of the program, I recommend stepping on the scale every morning to track the changes in your bodyweight—mostly for psychological reasons. Seeing how your decision to stick (or not stick) to your meal plan directly affects the number on the scale is incredibly motivating. Your morning weigh-in serves as a daily reminder that your hard work and discipline are paying off, and little by little, you are getting closer to your goal. Moreover, the disappointment you’ll feel on those days when the scale doesn’t budge (or moves in the opposite direction) is a powerful reminder to try a bit harder.





FINE TUNING YOUR DIET


As we’ve discussed throughout this book, your body is very adept at dealing with stress. This is a good thing when you’re hammering it with heavy weights, as it responds by building muscle and making you stronger. But your body’s ability to adapt can also work against you, particularly when you’re trying to shed fat.

Calorie restriction is a form of stress to which your body will adapt by slowing down your metabolism. This can happen for a few reasons. First, successful dieting means you are losing mass, and smaller bodies with less tissue burn fewer calories than larger ones. Second, you consume less food on a diet, so there is a natural reduction in the thermic effect of food (TEF)—the calorie burn associated with breaking down and processing the foods you eat. Third, there is a general slowing of your metabolic rate due to changes in hormones like leptin, insulin, and the thyroid hormones (triiodothyronine and thyroxine). All of these things can affect your basal metabolic rate (BMR): the number of calories your body burns each day just keeping you alive. A reduction in your BMR means that your body has become more efficient and learned to perform its daily functions using less energy. This is not a good thing when you’re trying to burn off a bunch of stored body fat. Ideally, you want an inefficient metabolism that “wastes” a lot of fuel.

The preferred approach to calorie restriction in this program is a linear one. By moving up a row in the meal plan table, you’ll create a steady caloric deficit, which should lead to consistent and predictable fat loss. But the body can be uncooperative, and at some point in your journey to low levels of body fat, you might hit a hard sticking point.

If you’ve been inconsistent with your diet, fix that first. For example, if you stuck to your meal plan for only three days one week and your weight didn’t change, try to get four or five days in the following week and see if that moves the number on the scale in the right direction. But if you’ve worked your way down to the lowest-calorie meal plan in the table (160–180 pounds) and, despite your diligence and strict adherence to your diet, you simply cannot seem to drop any more weight, you may need to implement a more aggressive strategy to break through a fat-loss plateau.



Carb/calorie cycling

One way to reduce your total caloric intake throughout the week is to eat different amounts of food on different days, a strategy known as “calorie cycling.” And since you need to keep your protein intake high to preserve your muscle mass as you diet, the best macronutrient to manipulate when cycling calories is carbohydrates. By alternating between higher-carb days and lower-carb days, you can create a bigger deficit over the course of the week without feeling deprived throughout the day or unnecessarily fatigued during your workouts.

To implement this approach, simply reduce your carbohydrate intake on two or three non-training days each week. Start with breakfast. If you’re eating Overnight Oats, replace it with a two-scoop protein shake mixed with almond milk or water. If you’ve opted for the Prot-Meal and Eggs breakfast option, keep the eggs, but swap out the oatmeal for one scoop of whey protein mixed with water. Stick with this new plan for a few weeks and see if it produces measurable fat loss.

When you hit another weight-loss plateau for two consecutive weeks, try cutting carbohydrates in your other meals. On your designated low-carb days, ditch the sweet potatoes and/or rice when preparing The Big Beef Bowl. Or if the absence of rice leaves you feeling hungry, try replacing it with riced cauliflower to add more volume to the meal (refer to the appendix for a detailed low-carb meal plan template). On the remaining days of the week, keep your carbs and calories a little higher by eating your standard meal plan.

These small changes will increase your daily deficit by several hundred calories while keeping your protein intake high enough to ensure that your body has what it needs to maintain your muscle mass.

Start off conservatively with two lower-carb days per week. Remember, these should ideally be non-training days since you’ll want a healthy dose of carbohydrates to help fuel your workouts. Two days may be enough to get things moving in the right direction. If it’s not, or if it eventually stops working, add an additional lower-carb day or two and you should see an improvement.

Many trainees will need to fully exhaust this approach to reach very low body-fat levels. In fact, by the time you’re nearing 10% body fat, most, if not all, of your days will likely be low-carb days.





KEEP LIFTING HEAVY


Every time a new client wants to talk about getting rid of unwanted body fat, they almost always begin with questions about how much cardio they need to add to their training. I’ve even had a few members quit the gym altogether, thinking that lifting weights is for getting bigger and running is for losing weight. Nothing could be further from the truth. Yes, you need to lift weights when you’re trying to build muscle, but you sure as hell need to keep lifting weights when you’re trying to get shredded.

Eating at maintenance or above means you are consuming roughly the same number of calories your body burns each day or slightly more. When you begin to restrict your caloric intake, your body will start looking for the missing fuel in the places you store extra energy. Ideally, this means you’ll begin releasing and oxidizing fat from your adipose tissue, an abundant and seemingly limitless depot of available energy. But your body can also start breaking down muscle tissue to access important amino acids and slow your metabolism if 1) you cut your calories too drastically and fail to provide sufficient protein from your diet, and 2) you don’t give your body a damn good reason not to break down your muscle.

One very good way to signal your body to spare your precious muscle mass is to use it on a regular basis by continuing to lift heavy weights while dieting. If your body knows you need your muscle for those heavy squats and deadlifts, it’s more likely to skew its caloric scavenger hunt towards stored fat. If your goal is to get lean, this is exactly what you want.

So you need to keep lifting heavy to preserve your hard-earned muscle while cutting, but you also need to understand that in a calorie-restricted state, you’re consuming less fuel. You might feel more tired and rundown than you do during the phases of training when you’re focused on eating enough to add mass. You won’t notice it right away, but once you lose enough weight, your workouts can get more difficult and fatiguing.

Physiologically, this result makes sense. As discussed earlier, in the same way that you don’t add only muscle mass in a caloric surplus—fat and other stuff come with the new weight gain—it’s unlikely (though possible) that you’ll lose only fat in a deficit. There may be a small loss of muscle tissue as well. By continuing to lift heavy and keeping your protein intake high, you can mitigate the loss, but with less force-producing muscle and fewer caloric resources to fuel your workouts and aid recovery, a decrease in performance is to be expected.

The more bodyweight you cut, the more “bad” days you should expect in the gym. Weights will feel heavy. You’ll feel tired. Your body may feel stiff and achy. Recovery, generally, will become more difficult. Your training program, therefore, must be flexible enough to accommodate these natural fluctuations in energy levels, work capacity, and enthusiasm.

Fortunately, the intermediate and advanced templates in this program work beautifully during periods of focused fat loss. With features like target rep ranges and back-off sets, both templates are designed to allow you to push hard on the days you feel good while training to the best of your abilities on the days you feel weak and sluggish. Moreover, both templates have a moderate rate of progression and don’t require you to add weight to the bar every time you train since it won’t likely be possible when calories are restricted and building new muscle is unlikely.

Practically speaking, if you’re still using the novice template when you decide to switch over to a fat-loss phase, that’s a good time to move on to the intermediate training template. And if you’re already using the intermediate or advanced template, just stick with your program as you begin to reduce your food intake. When the weight loss starts to affect your performance, and you’re consistently getting stuck or regressing, reset your top-set weights (as outlined in the previous chapters) and restart the process of working through the program.

Remember, the goal has changed. While continuing to get stronger and setting new PRs would be nice, it’s important that you understand that during the cutting phases of your training, increasing your strength isn’t the objective—losing fat is. That doesn’t mean you’ll never improve your performance while cutting, but don’t expect it, and more importantly, don’t get upset if it doesn’t happen.

Fitness is a lifelong endeavor, and you’ll have plenty of opportunities to bulk back up and reach new levels of strength later. For now, keep your focus on losing fat, and use the number on the scale and your bulging arm veins as the only important measures of progress.





TIPS FOR HACKING HUNGER


As you can see, getting lean is a straightforward process—keep lifting heavy weights to the best of your ability while steadily reducing the amount of food you eat until you hit your desired body composition. But simple doesn’t mean easy, particularly when it comes to your psychology.

Your workouts can be challenging, but they pale in comparison to the mental battle of dieting. Psyching yourself up for a heavy set of squats requires about sixty seconds of grit and determination. Avoiding highly palatable junk food is an incessant and unrelenting struggle you must deal with every waking hour.

You might not be satisfied with the way you look, but your body is quite happy when you’re a little chubby. From an evolutionary perspective, being very lean is dangerous. What if it takes longer than you expected to hunt down a caribou? What if there’s a particularly harsh winter and the crop yield is insufficient? Having extra calories to draw from during periods of limited food availability is a smart survival strategy, which almost certainly explains why storing fat is one of the simpler metabolic processes.

As you get closer to your ideal level of leanness, your body is going to fight you more aggressively. Through a complex network of neurons, synapses, and hormones, your brain will try to convince you to not be so strict with your diet and to cheat more often with foods that quickly replace missing calories. The leaner you get, the louder and more persistent these cries for calories become.

I’ll be honest; the end of a fat-loss phase is pretty damn miserable. You’ve cut out most of your carbs, so your energy levels are in the tank and your workouts suck, and the total amount of food you’re allowed to eat has gotten so low that you’re hungry all the time. This is why most people quit and never get really lean. But there are a few helpful tactics and mantras you can use to conquer the cravings and keep you motivated as you near the finish line.



Remember that you’re supposed to be hungry

Understand that when you are restricting calories, you will be hungry. The truth is, you’re supposed to be hungry. Hunger does not mean you are starving and you need to eat—it just means your body is used to being fed a certain number of calories at certain times of the day, which you (for some crazy reason) are no longer providing. Stop viewing hunger as a call to eat and start celebrating it as a sign of progress.



Replace the habit

I typically enjoy a cocktail at the end of a long day. It’s a nice little reward for getting my work done, and the routine of sipping a drink while catching up on some reading helps me decompress. When I’m dieting, however, I usually don’t have extra calories to waste on alcohol, particularly towards the end of my cut.

Rather than sit on the couch and pine for a margarita, I’ve found that replacing it with something else, like flavored carbonated water, helps maintain my routine without making me feel deprived.

When hunger pangs arrive, putting something else in your mouth, like coffee, tea, flavored fizzy water, or gum can help distract you and keep the cravings at bay. The caffeine in coffee and green tea also has the added benefit of being a mild appetite suppressant. Even slamming a few glasses of plain water will fill your stomach and give you the sensation that you’re full.

Moreover, the time it takes to heat up some water for tea or brew a pot of coffee can interrupt the craving thought-pattern and give you an opportunity to ask yourself a useful question: “Is what I’m about to eat moving me closer to or farther away from my goal?” If you can pause, breathe, and think clearly for a moment, the craving will likely pass, and you’ll be less likely to give in to counterproductive impulses.



“Not one bite”

If you’ve ever worked in an office, you’ve probably witnessed the dance your co-workers do around the snack foods and treats commonly available in the kitchen or breakroom. People will cut themselves a small piece to get a little taste and try to satisfy a craving without feeling like gluttons. This is a terrible strategy, and perhaps one you’re guilty of using, too. Once your brain gets a hit of the sugar, salt, and fat, it’ll start screaming for more. You may have taken only a tiny bite at first, but you’ll inevitably come back to pick at the plate multiple times throughout the day. You have a much better chance of sticking to your diet by avoiding these temptations altogether and not triggering the powerful biochemical response and corresponding cascade of hormones released by the reward centers in your brain.

As you walk past the crowd of colleagues pecking at a fresh box of donuts, tell yourself “Not one bite.” Abstinence may not work for horny teenagers, but when it comes to dieting, an all-or-nothing approach is much easier to sustain.



Get it out of the house

It’s easy to resist cheating on your diet when you’re not yet tired and mentally fatigued. But as you go about your day and deal with the stresses of life, your ability to think clearly and stick to your meal plan can become more challenging.

When you get home from a grueling day at work, you’ll likely want to relax and reward yourself with a beer, a glass of wine, or some of that ice cream in the freezer. But if those things aren’t readily available, you’re much less likely to indulge. So get all food that’s not part of your meal plan out of your house. Set aside time (preferably after a meal when you’re full) to go through your pantry and fridge and toss or donate anything you don’t want to be tempted to eat later.

When the cravings arrive, having to get in your car and drive to the store to grab some junk food is an additional step that gives you a moment to think about what you’re doing and why, and then, hopefully, decide against it. You won’t always win the battle, but you’ll be more likely to remember your bigger goal and decide to just have some tea or slam another protein shake and go to bed.

Don’t rely on willpower alone. Instead, do everything you can to create an environment that will keep you on track even when your willpower is waning.



Beware of booze

I’m a big whiskey fan, but alcohol is not your friend when you’re trying to lose weight. Though it can temporarily halt the fat-burning process, there’s nothing inherently wrong with the occasional cocktail, except that booze significantly impairs your judgment. Once you get a little buzz going, you’re much more likely to chase your glass of wine with some snacks or dessert you shouldn’t be eating. Even if you’ve cleared out your pantry, that one drink can easily turn into three or four. Better to save the booze for your free meals.



Be prepared

Finally, set yourself up for success by preparing some of your meals in advance whenever possible. You already know what you have to eat each day, and it’s the same damn thing as the day before. Make life easier by cooking multiple meals at once so you always have what you need when you need it.

Meal prepping is as simple as multiplying the ingredients in your recipes and then portioning each serving into a microwaveable storage container. When cooking The Big Beef Bowl, for example, make eight servings, eat one for dinner, and store the rest in the fridge. That way, you have to cook only about twice a week.

The goal is to reduce the friction and make adhering to your diet the easiest choice. When you’re hungry, it’s best if the most convenient option is the one you’re supposed to pick. If your dinner is ready and waiting for you, you’re more likely to take a few steps to the fridge than expend extra energy cooking something new or ordering takeout.





ENDING THE CUT


The first time you run a cutting phase will be the longest because you’ll likely have a decent amount of fat to lose. Getting down to 10% body fat may take several months of dieting (broken up with planned refeeds). But after the initial cut, your body will be a lean, well-oiled, muscle-building machine, much more adept at partitioning calories towards repairing tissue, building mass, and fueling your workouts, and less likely to store excess calories as fat. Therefore, it won’t take nearly as long to strip off whatever minimal body fat you accumulate during subsequent building phases. (Refer to Chapter 4 to see a hypothetical timeline for the gaining and cutting phases.)

Deciding when to end the fat-loss phase can be subjective. If you like what you see in the mirror, if you’re happy with your muscle definition, if your arm veins are clearly visible, if you’re getting too much attention from the opposite (or same) sex, or if you’re just sick and tired of dieting and can’t wait to set some new PRs in the gym, then it’s entirely reasonable to end the cut. If you want a more objective measure, schedule a DEXA scan and see if you actually hit the 10% body-fat goal. (Remember to take a photo and note the actual body-fat percentage so you can get better at eyeballing it next time.)

Personally, I find it helpful to have a hard end date on the calendar that corresponds to some event for which I’m trying to look my best. The last time I cut, for example, I had a photoshoot scheduled for the release of this book. Before that, I set a goal of getting to 10% body fat by my fortieth birthday. For you, it could be a wedding, a high school reunion, or a vacation to a tropical destination where you’ll likely be photographed without a shirt. If nothing coincides with a realistic timeline for ending your fat-loss phase, book a DEXA scan and mark it on your calendar. Anything that adds significance and a sense of purpose to your cut, even if it’s arbitrary, will help keep you motivated.

When you do finally hit your ideal body composition and you’re satisfied with what you’ve accomplished, pat yourself on your muscular back for a job well done, go crush a box of donuts, and then get ready to restart the program and do it all over again.





CHAPTER 13





THE CYCLE CONTINUES





Once you’ve made it through your first full cycle of the program, you’ll no longer be a newbie in the gym. As a more seasoned player in the iron game, you’ll have learned how to build a decent amount of muscle mass and how to peel away enough body fat to reveal a physique that most guys dream of but never achieve. Your strength will be well above average, and your body fat will be well below. You will be the exception, not the rule.

For the remainder of your training career, you’ll cycle between the two phases covered up to this point, spending a few months building as much lean mass as possible and then cutting away the fat. Alternating between gaining and cutting phases is as simple as moving down or up one row in the meal plan table to increase or decrease your calories. When it’s time to cut, move up one row. When it’s time to bulk back up, move down one row. Keep tracking your bodyweight with a series of weekly weigh-ins. When your weight plateaus for two weeks, move to the next row.

Adjusting your training for each goal is as straightforward as manipulating your diet. By the time you begin cycling between gaining and cutting phases, you should have worked your way to the intermediate or advanced training templates. During gaining phases, the increase in calories will create optimal conditions for you to pack on new muscle and tackle new strength goals. When you switch to a fat-loss phase, your strength may plateau or even regress temporarily as you reduce your caloric intake, but a simple de-load or reset will allow you to train to the best of your abilities and protect your muscle mass.

As mentioned earlier, your goal during each run through the program is to increase your strength and lean mass while allowing your body fat to climb from a starting point of around 10% to no more than 15% (which is still a healthy, athletic-looking physique). Once you hit 15%, it’s probably time to cut again.

With each year of consistent training, the amount of muscle you can realistically gain will decrease as you get closer and closer to your genetic limitations. Most trainees can squeeze in one or two gaining cycles per year if they follow the plan. As a very general guide, if you do everything perfectly, the lean mass you’ll be able to add each time will look something like this:



Possible muscle mass added over time.



Remember, the “Total Bodyweight Added” column is not cumulative because you will be alternating the gaining phases with periods of focused fat loss. By the time you’ve been training consistently for four to five years, you will have likely hit your genetic limit for adding new lean muscle tissue, and it will be time to quit lifting weights and join the local Pilates studio. (Just kidding.)





MAINTENANCE AND MOTIVATION


There are a few questions all lifters eventually wrestle with, like “When am I strong enough?” and “When do I stop trying to set new PRs and just focus on maintaining my strength?” Training means having a goal—a place you’re trying to go to. Initially, that goal will be increasing strength and size and then reducing body fat. But there are physiological limits to how strong, muscular, and shredded the average, drug-free trainee can get. I don’t know what your individual limitations are, but they most certainly exist.

There will come a point when the pursuit of a new PR will not be worth the effort it takes to get there. Squatting 315 pounds is one thing—most guys with a modicum of discipline can accomplish this within a year of training. Squatting 600 pounds, however, is a completely different mountain to climb and requires a level of commitment and favorable genetics that not all possess. So while “getting stronger” is always the goal, as you advance through your training career, that can come to mean different things.

Life has a way of resetting you. You’ll get sick and have to take some weight off the bar; you’ll go on vacation and have to take some weight off the bar; you’ll tweak your back or pull a hamstring and have to take some weight off the bar. “Stronger” doesn’t always mean setting an all-time personal best—sometimes it just means an improvement over your current level of strength at a particular moment. Your motivation for busting your ass in the gym and sticking to your diet, therefore, will eventually become less about breaking records and more about fighting entropy or clawing your way back to where you were before an inevitable interruption.

Fortunately, there are ways to keep training interesting beyond just adding more weight to the bar. You can try to do more reps with a given weight. You can work on progressing in new assistance exercises. You can focus on developing lagging muscle groups, sign up for a powerlifting meet, or start any number of new activities—like mountain biking, golf, or jiu-jitsu—that provide an opportunity to apply the strength you’ve worked so hard to develop. Alternatively, as I mentioned in the last chapter, you can set a target date for completing a cutting phase by a birthday, high school reunion, wedding, or tropical vacation.

Be creative with your goals. The motivation that sustains your desire to continue training beyond the novice and intermediate phases will come from the knowledge that you are making progress towards whatever target you’ve set your sights on.



The long haul

I’ve been lifting weights consistently for over twenty years. My days of setting new squat PRs are most likely behind me, and there’s a good chance I’ve already put on all the muscle mass I ever will—it’s certainly not getting any easier as I get older. But I still (though somewhat reluctantly) train every week.

I used to love being in the gym. It was my happy place. I’d willingly follow training programs that kept me there for hours. And when I wasn’t lifting, I was thinking about lifting—reading articles, watching videos, devouring books, learning everything I could about this new pursuit. But as with most things, the excitement eventually faded.

Most of the guys I know who have been lifting as long as I have don’t care for it much anymore. We’re tired, are beat up, and have ticked off most of the benchmark goals that motivate new trainees. We’ve squatted 405. We’ve deadlifted 500. We’ve benched 315.

Moreover, many of us are married or in serious relationships. We’re not as interested in getting shredded for the summer and trying to attract the attention of bikini-clad coeds as we once were.

Right now, the thought of going into my cold garage and getting under a heavy barbell sounds rather unappealing. But I’m still going to drag my ass down there because as much as I hate training, I hate not training more. If I miss more than one or two workouts, I feel like a fat, lazy slob. Lifting is part of who I am. It’s just something I do. And in the absence of my regular dose of hard, physical effort, I don’t feel like myself.

Sometimes I have great workouts. Sometimes I have awful ones. But no matter how much I dread starting a new workout, I know from decades of experience that I always feel better when I’m done. Not only am I proud of myself for winning another battle against the inner voice telling me to take it easy, but also I feel both calmer and more energized, and I’m generally in a better mood. There are well-established biochemical explanations for this, but I’m not all that concerned with why I feel good after training. I just know that I will, and that’s enough motivation for me to keep going.

The sad, unavoidable truth is that there will come a day when you are the biggest and strongest you will ever be, and you’ll realize it only in retrospect. You will be best served by remembering that your personal satisfaction will not come from reaching your goal, but rather will be found in its pursuit. If you have the good fortune to be healthy enough to lay hands on a barbell a few times a week, be grateful, and learn to enjoy the simple act of challenging yourself and pushing your body’s limits, wherever they happen to be at the time.





CHAPTER 14





THE MENTAL GAME





Whether it’s chasing a new personal record, packing on slabs of muscle mass, or dieting down to low levels of body fat, these kinds of pursuits are both physically and mentally challenging. The preceding chapters provide a blueprint for what to do; the hard part is doing it and persisting long enough to see the results. Your body and mind are formidable opponents when it comes to making any meaningful change, so it’s useful to adopt a set of guiding principles and personal rules that can help keep you focused and resolute when things get difficult.





PRINCIPLE 1: STICK TO YOUR PLAN


Any seasoned personal trainer or strength coach will tell you that the real key to their clients’ success is consistency. It turns out that successful trainees all seem to have one thing in common, and it’s not their program, their diet strategy, or the supplements they take. It’s their commitment to showing up. No training program will produce results if you make it to only half your workouts. Conversely, I’ve seen plenty of clients take a sub-optimal program and by either sheer force of will or reluctance to change, work the hell out of it and make extraordinary progress that even I didn’t think was possible.

When things get hard (and they will), you’re going to be tempted to start screwing with your program or scrapping it altogether in favor of a more novel approach. But any time you make big, sweeping changes to what you’re doing, there is a period of stagnation or regression while you adjust to the new routine. Weights need to be reduced and recalibrated; diet strategies and meal plans need to be adjusted. You end up losing valuable time and sabotaging your progress simply because things got tough or you got bored, and you quit prematurely.

I wasted what should have been some of the most productive years of my training career jumping from one program or diet strategy to another. And I’ve sat across from countless clients who came to me for help after endless cycles of unnecessary tweaking and program-hopping with no real progress to show for it. Learn from their mistakes and mine. Stick to your plan, longer than you think you should.



Schedule it

One of the most effective tactics for improving consistency is to schedule everything. When you know what nights you have to lift each week, you can plan social events accordingly so you don’t miss workouts. When you have dedicated times to eat throughout the day, you’re less likely to skip meals and risk succumbing to hunger and cravings. Treat your meals and workouts like meetings, dentist appointments, or any other important events you have during your day. You may even want to set reminder notifications for a few weeks until you establish a routine (at which point your stomach will remind you when it’s time to eat.)

Take ten minutes and write out all the things you do on a typical day, along with the time you do them. Then look at your schedule and decide when you’ll eat and train. The final product might look like this:

6:00 a.m. – Wake up; coffee

6:30 a.m. – Take the dog out

7:00 a.m. – Breakfast

8:00 a.m. – Leave for work

10:00 a.m. – Protein shake

12:30 p.m. – Lunch

3:30 p.m. – Protein shake

5:30 p.m. – Gym

7:00 p.m. – Take the dog out again

7:30 p.m. – Dinner

9:30 p.m. – Shower

10:00 p.m. – Bed





Whatever your typical day looks like, create an ideal schedule so you know exactly when to eat and when to lift. Build the habit. Make everything a matter of routine. When 3:30 p.m. rolls around, pound your protein shake. When you walk in the door after taking the dog out, don’t sit on the couch and get sucked into a social media vortex (that’s not on the schedule); start cooking dinner. After work, head straight to the gym. Motivation follows action, not the other way around. The more decisions you can eliminate, the more likely you’ll be to stay on track.



Your plan is your guideline

Well-laid plans give you purpose, direction, and a way of holding yourself accountable. All the decisions about what you’re going to do were made beforehand, when your mind was clear and you were thinking logically about your goals. Once you decide to move forward, there is no more ambiguity. You know exactly what to do in the gym, what to shop for at the store, and what to eat because it’s the same goddamn thing as last time. Either you stick to the plan, or you don’t. Your whims or fluctuations in motivation and enthusiasm for what you’re currently doing are peripheral. The plan is the plan. All you need to worry about is executing it.

Moreover, with a solid plan, you can take comfort in the fact that you’re never really lost. Should you get distracted or sidetracked, miss workouts, give in to cravings, get sick, go on vacation, or just have a momentary lapse in motivation, you can return to your plan, and it will guide you back to a path to progress.

In his best-selling book Atomic Habits, author James Clear advocates adopting the mantra “Never miss twice.” Sometimes you lose the battle. Sometimes the cravings win, and you deviate from your plan. That’s okay. Don’t beat yourself up over it or give up on your larger goal. Just acknowledge that you had a moment of weakness and get back on track as quickly as possible. A mistake is a problem only if it becomes a pattern. Remember, consistency is the single most important factor in your success. Stick to your plan and the results will follow.





PRINCIPLE 2: SEEK DISCOMFORT


The first strength coach I ever hired in my gym was a spirited young Polish-American woman. We were getting more female clients in the gym, and I wanted to have someone around whom they could look up to. It turned out that she was also very effective at motivating our male clients, and not for the reasons you’d think.

One evening she was coaching a thirty-something advertising executive named Evan through a tough set of squats. His goal was to complete five reps, but as he finished the fourth, he stopped and put the bar down. He turned to his coach and said, “Sorry, I didn’t have another one.” The thing is, he did—it was obvious to all of us watching. His speed was good; his technique held up; he just got nervous and quit. Without hesitation, my new hire got right in his face and screamed, “What the fuck was that, Evan?!?! You had that rep. Don’t be a pussy! Get back under the bar and finish your fucking set!”

Nervous that she had crossed the line and we were about to lose a client, I pulled her aside and told her, “Go easy on the guy. It’s okay. This is supposed to be fun for him. The last thing he wants is to come into the gym and get berated during his workout.”

Before he left that evening, Evan walked over to both of us. As I started in with another apology for my employee’s overly enthusiastic behavior, he cut me off and, to my surprise, said, “Thank you. I really needed to hear that tonight. You’re right. I quit too soon.”

That night was a big turning point in Evan’s training. He knew his coach was right—he had given up early, he had quit on himself, and he got called out for it. It was not a good feeling.

Every guy, at some point in his life, needs to be told to “harden the fuck up” by someone he respects. It needs to sting. That awful feeling is the only thing that will motivate you to stay the course and not half-ass the difficult process of personal development.

I watched Evan closely over the next few months, and his training improved dramatically. He pushed himself harder than he had before. He didn’t always finish his reps, but I never again saw him rack the bar without a fight.

Many people go through life thinking that pain and discomfort are always bad and should be avoided at all costs. If something hurts, it must be wrong. But any kind of meaningful change usually requires that you venture beyond your comfort zone.

If you want a better career, for example, you might have to do the hard work of putting yourself through more school, updating your résumé, or going on job interviews. If you want a better relationship, you might have to experience the heartache of ending your current one and putting yourself back into the dating pool. And if you want to change the way your body looks and performs, you’re going to have to do things you don’t necessarily want to do, like going to the gym on days you don’t feel like lifting, eating or not eating certain foods in certain amounts that make you uncomfortable, and training around nagging injuries, like occasional back tweaks and muscle pulls, even though they hurt.

Learning to deal with these challenges as they present themselves will make you more physically and mentally resilient. It won’t happen overnight, but little by little, the cumulative effect of overcoming each one of these small obstacles will better prepare you to take on the inevitable adversity life throws your way both in and out of the gym.



Ignore your feelings

We have a saying in my business: “How you feel is a lie.” I can’t count the number of times I’ve had clients walk through the door after a hard day at work. They got no sleep, they have a cold or a hangover, they feel like shit, and they’re convinced they’re in for a terrible workout. But after lacing up their shoes and doing a few warmup sets, they end up having one of the best training sessions they’ve had in months, and they walk out of the gym feeling much better than when they arrived. Most trainees will eventually experience this.

Feelings are subjective and often misleading. And listening to them will give you an excuse to quit when things get difficult. Instead, as we just discussed, focus on sticking to your plan regardless of how you feel. Your program, not your feelings, tells you what you have to get done at each workout or how much food you need to eat (or not eat) each week to make progress. We want binary feedback here—zeros and ones, baby. Did you get it or not? Did you succeed or fail? Your feelings are irrelevant.

Remember, your body doesn’t want to change. It likes you just the way you are (and maybe even a little fatter and weaker). So if you’re going to make it build new muscle or force it to get rid of unwanted fat, you have to leave it no choice. That means occasionally pushing yourself beyond your limits and doing hard things you don’t necessarily want to do. Grinding through a heavy rep or guzzling another protein shake, even when you don’t feel like it, is where the magic happens. That’s how you grow, both physically and psychologically.

There comes a point when it all feels like shit. Once the weights get heavy enough, they always feel varying degrees of terrible. Similarly, when you lose enough body fat, you’ll have some days when you’re hungry and other days when you’re downright starving. So what? If this were easy, every dude would be shredded and strong. If you want to make real change, accept that you will sometimes feel like shit, and do what needs to be done anyway.

Eventually you learn that if you want to make progress, you’re going to have to seek out a little discomfort and push forward in spite of it. Not in one big leap, but in a series of small incremental steps over time.

When your subconscious starts screaming at you to back off the weights, skip a training day, or eat some crappy food, remember that you committed to this program after careful evaluation. You decided it was something you wanted to pursue. So make the difficult decision to let your program dictate your actions and leave your feelings out of it.



Focus on the “one hard thing”

The beauty of this radically simple approach is that you have only one hard thing to do at a time. For each exercise, you’ll be working up to just one hard set. Get it done, and you win for the day. You’re still in the game, and you get to move to the next level.

One hard set is a relatively small ask—less than a minute of discomfort and all-out intensity. I’m no Navy SEAL, but I can wrap my head around that, and you can, too. As you move through the program, you’ll discover that the brief, concentrated bursts of focus and effort required to sustain progress will cause you to push just a bit harder than you normally would. You’ll tap into an extra gear you’d forgotten about or never knew you had.

Some weeks will be more difficult than others. You’ll be nervous walking into the gym. The warmup sets will feel heavier than they should. And during your final set, you’ll be holding the bar, wondering if you can finish the last rep. You’ll be tempted to quit. But you know what you need to do. You have just one hard thing, a few more seconds of discomfort, and regardless of how you feel, you’re going to get it done.

Anyone can do one hard thing at a time. Attack it with passion and fervor. Go all in and move on. And when you get it done, you’ll wake up the next day and be proud of yourself for it. You’ll feel like a badass. Compound that consistent effort over years of training and it will transform you. Do one hard thing, day after day, and you’ll find there is little you can’t accomplish.



Discomfort is the way

You can’t hide in your comfort zone forever. Eventually, everyone who tries to avoid discomfort has to confront the realization that they’re stuck—that their life is no better today than it was a few years ago. Success is usually found just past the point at which most people want to quit.

Strength training has taught me a lot about myself and what I’m capable of, and the process has made me a lot tougher than I’d otherwise be. Back tweaks and muscle pulls are one thing, but looking in the mirror and admitting that you didn’t live up to your potential is far more devastating than any physical injury. If you want to improve your life, look for the discomfort. Seek it out. Run towards it. It’s almost always an indicator that you’re on the right track.





PRINCIPLE 3: DON’T TAKE THIS SHIT SO SERIOUSLY


Early in my lifting career, I had a standing rule with my girlfriend that she was never to ask me about my workouts when I got home from the gym. At best, it was a “punch the clock” training session with nothing to report. But more often, as I stumbled to solve this fitness puzzle on my own, I had a terrible workout and didn’t want to think about it anymore, let alone discuss it with my partner. God bless her for trying to be supportive and encouraging while I acted like an overgrown baby for whatever stupid reason I was upset that day. If I were her, I would have left my grumpy, muscular ass.

The process of trying to make yourself stronger through frequent, intentional exposure to stress will teach you valuable skills that apply to other areas of your life. One of those skills is learning to manage your emotions and quickly get back to a positive baseline when things don’t go as planned.

Throughout this program, you will have some truly great training days when you might start to wonder how you’d fare at The World’s Strongest Man competition. Most of your workouts, however, will be rather mediocre training sessions with little to celebrate other than the fact that you got to the gym and did what you were supposed to do. And occasionally, you’ll have a workout so terrible you wouldn’t be surprised if the gym staff asked you to leave the premises because your piss-poor performance is bumming out all the other members. Yes, you’re allowed to be upset and frustrated if a workout doesn’t go well, but overreacting to things that aren’t really that important in the long run is not productive.

Do not let your quest to slap on some muscle mass ruin the good things in your life. Do not neglect your partner, annoy your friends, and turn into a frustrated, annoying asshole who suffocates the gym with negativity. And for god’s sake, don’t take your shitty, frustrated attitude home to your family. Nobody deserves that, and they won’t put up with it for long.

Becoming a stronger man is an important endeavor. It will improve your health, your confidence, and your usefulness to those around you, but you need some perspective. You’re not curing cancer, rescuing an endangered species, or digging fresh-water wells in developing countries. You’re just lifting weights and dialing in your diet. And while these are meaningful pursuits, the fact that you did only four reps with 315 pounds instead of five reps is not that big a deal.



Good enough

To help keep your emotions and priorities in check, remind yourself often that good enough is, well, good enough. You know you will not be performing at your best every workout. That’s fine. Good enough means you did something worthwhile that day. You moved the needle, even a little bit. You got yourself to the gym, lifted some weight, ate approximately what you were supposed to eat, and so on. Maybe it didn’t go exactly as you’d hoped, but you tried. That’s more than what most people do, and it counts for a lot.

When a frustrating workout arrives, and you start to feel the waves of rage, disappointment, and self-loathing building up, step back and think about the bigger picture. Pull out your training notebook and reflect on how far you’ve come. Look at the difference between the weight you could lift on your first day and what you’re able to do now. Remind yourself that you’re chasing an important goal, even if today wasn’t exceptional or, worse, was downright embarrassing. The fact that you worked out is good enough, and as long as the barbell didn’t fall on your head and paralyze you, you get a chance to try again. Tomorrow can always be better.

A funny thing happens when you embrace a “good enough” mentality—you sneak up on greatness through consistent effort. When you keep your head down and focus on just showing up, doing your best for that day, not letting your emotions get too high or fall too low, you make progress over the long haul, through the compounding of a bunch of small victories and average workouts. Five more pounds on the bar this week; one more rep than last time; one less pound of fat—it all counts. So, when it comes to your training sessions, celebrate the good ones, forget about the bad ones, and try to stack up as many “good enough” workouts as you can. You’ll discover that over a long training career, “good enough” is actually pretty great.



Balance, not burnout

Based on the posts I see while scrolling through social media, as a coach, I’m supposed to tell you to “attack your training like a savage,” to “crush,” “dominate,” and “destroy” every workout. But I’ll spare you all that because, again, real-life success comes more from consistency than from intensity.

Getting bigger and stronger is a slow process. Building muscle, bone, ligament, and tendon takes time. And you don’t get to pull 500 pounds off the ground without first getting through 225, 315, and 405. Losing body fat without sacrificing your hard-earned muscle mass must also be done slowly—one pound at a time. So unless you’re trying to be a full-time powerlifter or a competitive bodybuilder (career choices I’d strongly advise against), you need to learn how to make fitness a sustainable part of your life, not your whole life. Extremes never work for long, and extreme people always burn out.

The programs and strategies in this book are intentionally brief, requiring you to be in the gym a few days a week for no more than an hour. Why? Because balance is the key to long-term success; because you’re not an obsessed gym-bro who spends all his time living and breathing fitness; because, while training is an important part of life, it is just one aspect of a robust, multidimensional existence; and because you can absolutely reach your goals and build an awesome physique on an abbreviated schedule.

While there will be short periods of focused “unbalance” throughout your training, like when you’re pushing for a new PR or nearing the end of a cutting phase, always remember what you’re striving for—realistic goals like above-average strength and below-average body fat. You’re not trying to win at your hobby; you’re a guy with career goals, relationships, responsibilities, and other interests. You want to lift weights and manipulate your diet to improve your appearance and health. To make the most efficient use of your time in the gym. To get a good workout and then get on with the rest of your life.



Enjoy the process

I had a client named Sean who came into the gym to test his new one-rep max on the squat. He’d been following an online coach’s program for over a year and was eager to see his diligent efforts pay off with a new personal record. Unfortunately, he loaded 530 pounds on the barbell, squatted down, and failed to come back up. Twelve months of hard work and he thought he had nothing to show for it. He stood up, head hanging low, and exclaimed, “Why do I do this? What’s the fucking point?”

Setting new personal records in the gym is fun, and striving to reach your goals is an important part of the process that keeps you accountable and engaged, but if your happiness and satisfaction are tied only to hard outcomes (like a new one-rep max), you’ll never enjoy the process.

The dirty little secret of strength training is that achieving your goals is never as satisfying as you imagine it will be. When you finally load three plates (315 pounds) on the bar for the first time, you’re going to experience a variety of emotions, like fear, dread, and excitement. And when you squat it successfully, your training partners will give you approving fist bumps, you’ll post a photo on social media celebrating the milestone, and you’ll feel a very rewarding sense of accomplishment … for about thirty seconds. Then you’ll start thinking how that wasn’t really as difficult as you thought it would be and how four plates (405 pounds) would look even cooler in a photo. Just like that, you’ve set your sights on a new goal. All the hard work and effort to finally squat three plates, and then the sense of joy you thought you’d feel is immediately replaced with a desire for more progress. It’s a bit cliché, but the real reward comes from the journey, not the destination.

Remember, this shit is supposed to be fun. The goal of training is to make your life better, and if it doesn’t do so, you should stop. That doesn’t mean every moment of every workout will be enjoyable, but the process should be a net positive. If you get to the point where you always dread your next session, you’re tired of eating, you’re afraid to go on vacation, and you come home pissed off after every workout, you’ll fall victim to the vicious cycle of negative emotion and eventually give up.

When you get pinned under a heavy squat, when the bar won’t break off the floor, when everything feels heavier than it should, look up to the gods, shake your fist, and laugh. They’re fucking with you, or perhaps they’re trying to teach you a lesson. Maybe not the one you wanted that day, but an important one nonetheless. Take it in stride, and when you walk through the doors of the gym, leave all the negativity and frustration behind.



Memento mori

Learning to master your emotions is an essential life skill that might save you from chewing out your boss and getting fired or saying things to your partner in anger that you immediately regret. The good news is that you get to practice this skill every time you go to the gym, and after years of training, you’ll get pretty good at it.

So embrace “good enough,” strive for balance, and enjoy the process. If all else fails, do what I do: Put that famous picture Pale Blue Dot on your phone to regularly remind yourself just how insignificant you are. None of us are getting out of here alive. You’re going to become cosmic dust one day. Yes, it’s a little nihilistic, but there’s comfort in accepting your meaningless place in the cosmos. Relax. Have fun. And don’t take any of this shit so seriously.





PURPOSEFUL PRINCIPLES


While sticking with your plan, getting comfortable with discomfort, and not taking things too seriously may seem like trite and rather obvious ideas, reminding yourself of these principles often will help you develop and maintain a balanced and sustainable relationship with fitness. With a solid plan in place, the resolve to see it through, and a healthy perspective about the journey, you can spend less time thinking about your training and focus more of your attention and energy on the other important things that add value to your life. And the notion that there are, in fact, more important things in life than lifting weights and getting jacked is a perfect segue into the final chapter of the book.





CHAPTER 15





YOUR BEST BODY. YOUR BEST LIFE.





Congratulations—you made it to the end of the book. Hopefully you’ve gained a deeper understanding of how to build a physique you’re proud of, and you’re excited to put this plan into action. But I’ll level with you: The program outlined in the preceding pages isn’t why it’s valuable. No, the real value in what you’ve just read is the journey upon which you are about to embark and what you will learn about yourself through the process.

Many people move through life without purpose or direction, desperate to find meaning. They have unfulfilling careers, unsatisfying relationships, and unrealized dreams. They’re stuck—trapped in a mundane routine. They sit in traffic, go to jobs they hate, and binge on Netflix shows while simultaneously scrolling through social media. They aren’t living; they’re merely existing.

But every so often, through crisis or struggle or the presence of some unexpected challenge we’re forced to deal with, we catch a glimpse of something more that jolts us out of our routine and reveals an important part of ourselves we had forgotten about or never realized we had. Something that reminds us of what we’re capable of and shows us that we have the power to mold and shape the world around us through our choices and actions.

The purpose of strength training is to intentionally expose yourself to stress. To put yourself in uncomfortable situations and see how you respond. This Sisyphean pursuit—the one that your mom will never understand, that your friends think you take too seriously, that your girlfriend is tired of hearing about, that you agonize and obsess over, that you hate one day and love the next—is a regularly scheduled reminder that you’re not fucking dead yet. There is untapped potential within you, and if you can just find a way to coax it out, you can move metaphorical mountains.

You don’t have to become an elite commando or one of these ultramarathon-running psychos who shatters his ankles and shits himself to prove how tough he is. You can tap into this mindset and learn these important lessons with little more than a barbell and some weights. As you set small, realistic goals and knock them down one by one, your confidence and resilience will grow over time.

The program in this book is a tool you can use to momentarily push yourself out of your comfort zone, to test your mettle, to find out what you’re made of, and then carry what you learned about your capabilities and your self-imposed limitations out into the rest of your life.

In my gym, we have something we like to call “oh shit!” weight. You load up your barbell, unrack it, feel the crushing pressure on your back, and think, “Oh shit! I’m not sure if I can do this.” But you do it anyway. And in doing so, you realize something very important—that you can do things you’re afraid of, and that you’re stronger than you thought you were. (Of course, as you drive home, you’ll have another realization: “Oh shit! I have to add five more pounds next time!” Oh shit indeed.)

Imagine what would happen if you applied some of the concepts covered in the book—embracing simplicity, setting realistic goals, sticking to a plan, seeking discomfort—outside the gym. What would happen if you stared directly at all the things you’re afraid of, let the anxiety wash over you, and learned to move forward in spite of it? What if you started ignoring all the negative feelings that keep you stagnant? What if you identified the “one hard thing” in each facet of your life and started chipping away at it? What could you accomplish?

Would you ask for that raise you deserve? Would you quit your job and start that business you’ve been dreaming about? Would you gather up the courage to ask out that cute barista? Would you finally have that painful conversation with your partner about what’s lacking in your relationship? What else could you do? More importantly, what kind of person could you become?

Going through this program will change you. Not all at once, but slowly over time through a series of small challenges and decisions that move you toward productive action. Decisions like getting your ass under the bar every week, no matter what. As you work through each phase of the program, deal with different obstacles, and learn to overcome them, see that you can overcome them, you will transform into a more confident, capable, self-assured man.





MORE THAN MUSCLE


The desire to get in better shape is not a superficial goal. What you see when you look in the mirror, or how you feel when you finally pull that heavy deadlift you’ve been chasing for months, directly affects your self-esteem and the way you carry yourself in the world. Like it or not, we are all judged harshly by our physical appearance—people read your body language and make snap decisions about who you are and where you stack up. And I don’t care how smart or wealthy you are, if you’re not reasonably happy with the way you look, you’re not going to project the type of confidence that helps you to get what you want in life.

Confidence is the hard-won reward for succeeding at difficult tasks you’ve deemed important. And building up your physical strength while improving your physique is an undeniably difficult task.

Above-average muscle mass and below-average body fat are typically indicators of good health. These attributes show that you take care of yourself, and you value your well-being—important qualities that people find attractive. When you see the results of your hard work and discipline start to pay off and realize you are stronger than most of the people around you, you’ll feel powerful—sexy, even—and you’ll begin to behave differently. You’ll walk taller and speak more clearly. You’ll relax. Little things, like your blowhard boss barking at you or the guy who cut you off in traffic, won’t bother you because you’ll know, deep down, that you could crush their out-of-shape asses (of course, you choose not to). That’s worth something. It tips the scales of our soft, modern culture back towards primal balance and makes you realize you’re not merely a passenger in life.

The bottom line is that how you look and feel matters. It’s not trivial, superficial, vain, or “toxic,” and the pursuit of this kind of self-improvement doesn’t make you a silly, narcissistic bro—it makes you a competent, useful man. The day you accept this and make the decision to do something about it will be a turning point in your life.





WHERE WILL YOU BE IN A YEAR?


Running through the first cycle of this program will take you about a year. That’s only twelve months. Think back a year. It didn’t seem that long ago, did it? A year is nothing, a minor blip on the timeline of your life, but what you can accomplish in that period is truly significant if you commit yourself to the process.

Can you get your shit together for the next fifty-two weeks? Can you organize your life and focus your efforts for 100 workouts? Sure, you might need to have a heart-to-heart with your partner and explain that you’ve set a goal for yourself that you intend to reach. You might need to skip a couple dinner parties or social events you didn’t really want to go to anyway. You might need to prepare some meals ahead of time and go to bed a little earlier than normal. But you can do it if you decide it’s important.

Make the singular theme for the next year of your life be “change.” Put yourself on an information detox. Ignore what all the silly bros and juiced-up fitness influencers are posting online. Don’t worry about the latest exercise science research or that article about some fad diet or magical nutritional supplement. All that shit will be there for you to obsess over later if you choose.

Pick this program or another like it, and just do it. Let your training be a form of meditation, a much-needed respite from the other stresses in your life. For the next few months, stop overthinking and just get under the barbell and lift. Clear your mind. Be selfish. Be intentional. Be completely and totally present. Focus all of your attention on the one hard thing you have to do at each training session and gut it out. Do it for a year and watch what happens. In victory or defeat, you will have learned more valuable lessons by doing than by thinking about doing, and you’ll likely have changed the trajectory of your life in profoundly positive ways.

So no, it’s not this particular program that matters. What does matter is that you find something you’ll stick with. Something you enjoy. Something that fits your lifestyle that you’ll actually do. If you like it, you’ll be consistent. And if you’re consistent, you’ll succeed.

The tools are all here. The methods have been thoroughly tested and vetted, but I can’t do it for you. You have to decide to take the first step. Try it—see if you can make it work. And at the end of each day—when you’ve done your one hard thing, when you’ve lifted a little more weight, pushed for that extra rep, or just managed to make it through a workout you didn’t feel like doing—after you’ve racked the bar and before the crushing responsibilities of work and family and student-loan payments and medical bills flood your mind, bask in the brief afterglow, where for just a moment, you admit to yourself that you are a badass motherfucker. You were tested, and you prevailed. Breathe it in. Hold your head high. You earned it, and you can walk out of the gym knowing you’re a slightly better man than you were yesterday. That’s what we’re all chasing. That’s why we do this.

Now, go get after it. Build your body and strengthen your mind. Then do me a favor: share this information with someone else and light the path for them. Someone out there needs your help. Someone you know is waiting for you to inspire them. The world will be a better place for all of us with more strong, healthy, confident men like you in it.

Thank you for your time, your attention, and your commitment. I hope this book, in one way or another, has made your life better.





APPENDIX





RESOURCES





More information, including instructional videos for the exercises in this program, step-by-step cooking tutorials, and a list of recommended equipment for your gym and your kitchen can be found at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources. Additionally, as a thank you for purchasing this book, I’ve created larger, printable versions of the tables and templates used in the program. Visit https://www.hornstrength.com/thankyou to download the PDFs.





SAFETY





When compared to most other sports, lifting weights is a relatively safe activity—no one is trying to tackle you, punch you, or throw things at you in the gym (hopefully). But you can injure yourself or those around you if you’re careless. Here are a few important safety guidelines and best practices for each exercise to help protect you and minimize the risk of injury:





SQUAT


Always use collars on the bar.

Use chalk.

Wear proper weightlifting shoes (don’t lift barefoot).

Wear a belt. For most guys, a proper powerlifting belt is useful once you’re squatting around 200–225 pounds. You should put a belt on for your last one or two warmup sets so it doesn’t distract you during your work sets. If you’re under six feet tall, get a three-inch powerlifting belt. If you’re over six feet tall, get a four-inch belt.

If spotters aren’t available, you will need to squat inside the rack with the safety pins set at a height that will not interfere with the lift but will take the weight off your back if you miss. Test the height of the pins with an empty barbell before loading any weight. At the bottom of the squat, the pins should be a couple inches below the bar. If you don’t know how to set the safeties, ask for help.

If you are unable to get back up from the bottom of a squat, keep leaning over and crouching down until the bar is resting on the safeties. Do not try to raise your chest and dump the barbell off your back.





PRESS


Always use collars on the bar.

Use chalk.

Wear proper weightlifting shoes.

When the weights start to get heavy, wear a belt for your last one or two warmup sets and your working sets.

After unracking the bar, you need to take only one step back to clear the hooks. Stay close in case you need to rack the bar quickly.

When you complete the last rep, or fail during the ascent, bring the bar back down to your chest or shoulders and walk it back it to the rack. Do not try to throw the bar into the hooks from the top of the movement.





BENCH PRESS


The bench press is the only lift that could potentially kill you. Pay attention.

Never use collars on the bar. In the worst-case scenario, when you fail a rep and the bar comes back down onto your chest, you want the ability to dump the weight by rolling to one side, allowing the plates to slide off, and then rolling to the other side.

Use chalk.

Wearing a belt is optional and a matter of personal preference.

Always wrap your thumbs around the bar when you grip it. Never use a grip with the thumb placed on the same side of the bar as the rest of your fingers. This is known as a “suicide grip” since the bar can easily slip off your palm and crush your windpipe. I shouldn’t have to tell you not to use something with “suicide” in the name, but I see it all the time. Don’t do it.

Always lock your elbows when unracking and racking the bar. At the beginning and end of the set, you will be moving the bar over sensitive areas like your face, teeth, and throat. If the elbows are unlocked, there is a greater risk that you’ll lose control. Even an attentive spotter won’t be fast enough to catch the barbell if you drop it on your face.

If possible, always have someone spot you on your heavy bench press sets. Explain to the spotter that you’d like them to help you with the handoff (getting the bar from the hooks to a stable position over your shoulder joints). Then, tell your spotter to get out of the way so you have a clear view of the ceiling. Often, eager bro-types will want to hover over you during the set and try to help you lift the bar if it begins to slow, but if the spotter touches the bar during a rep, it doesn’t count. Explain to your spotter that he is to touch the bar only if it moves any direction other than up, at which point the rep is over and he should help you rack the bar immediately. You are not interested in forcing out extra reps with the spotter’s help. You may need to speak slowly and explain yourself several times before it sinks in—these guys can be stubborn.

If a spotter is unavailable or you train by yourself, you must bench press inside the rack with the safeties set at an appropriate height. That height will be one where the safeties do not make contact with the bar when you lower it to your chest, but will catch the bar if you bring it over your throat. Always test the height of the pins with an empty barbell before loading any weight, and make sure to leave enough room so you can slide your head out from underneath the bar when it’s resting on the safeties.

If you are unable to complete a rep on the bench press, carefully lower the bar over your neck and set it on the pins.





DEADLIFT


Use collars on the bar so the plates don’t slide off during the set.

Deadlift on a designated platform or some kind of thick rubber matting so you don’t damage the floor or the equipment.

Use chalk.

Wear weightlifting shoes (yes, even for deadlifts).

Wear a belt for your last one or two warmup sets and your work sets. Most lifters will find a three-inch powerlifting belt is most comfortable for the deadlift. That means if you are over six feet tall, you may need a four-inch belt for squats and presses and a three-inch belt for deadlifts.

Missing a rep on the deadlift is fairly straightforward. Simply put the bar back down on the floor as carefully as possible. Do not ever drop the bar. It’s bad for the equipment, it damages the floor, and it makes you look like an asshole. Keep your hands on the bar at all times, and control it as you get it back to the ground.





DEALING WITH INJURIES AND LAYOFFS





Interruptions in your training are inevitable. You’ll get sick, you’ll tweak your back, you’ll occasionally have to travel for work or go on your honeymoon, and you’ll be out of the gym for some period of time. It’s important that you know how to deal with each scenario so you can prevent or minimize any loss of progress.





INJURIES


Aside from wanting to look better and be stronger, one of the most common reasons a client comes to see me is to make sure they don’t injure themselves. Unfortunately, no matter how careful you are, if you train for long enough, you’ll eventually get hurt. As my coach Mark Rippetoe said, “Accumulating injuries [is] the price we pay for the thrill of not having sat around on our asses.”

Occasional injuries are part of the process of getting stronger. Every time you step into the gym, you’re asking your body to do something it’s never done before. It may only be an extra couple pounds on the bar or an extra rep, but it’s some kind of additional stress to which you’re trying to force your body to adapt. At some point, you’ll push a little too hard or you’ll get lazy with your technique on a warmup set and something will start to hurt. You need to be mentally prepared for this and know how to handle it so you can get back to training as quickly as possible.



Understanding pain

Pain science is a fascinating subject, most of which is beyond the scope of this book. (Check out https://www.painscience.com or the YouTube lectures from Professor Lorimer Moseley to learn more.) But briefly, the prevailing theory of modern pain science is known as the “biopsychosocial model,” which basically means that a multitude of factors—like hormones, genetics, mood, memory, environment, and personal biases—can influence why, how, when, and even how intensely you experience pain.

The main thing to understand is that pain is really weird. One hundred percent of pain is produced by the brain, and despite what you think and feel in the moment, the sensation of pain doesn’t always mean something is wrong.

Sure, if you put your hand on an open flame, your brain should send out a pain signal to the nerves in your fingers so you pull your hand away and don’t melt them off. But often, pain can be a warning that your body thinks an injury has occurred (or will occur soon) when in fact it hasn’t. In the latter case, the pain is not an indicator of damaged tissue, but rather a powerful protective mechanism alerting you to pay attention to a certain area of your body until your brain decides the threat is gone and you’re safe.

In either case, the sensation is the same and very real, but the underlying reason for the pain signal may be less “You just fucked something up really badly” and more “Hold up, dude! I think something might be about to go wrong down there.”

Everyone has what scientists call a “pain buffer.” Your pain buffer is essentially the set of gaps between 1) feeling no pain, 2) the threshold at which your body sends out a pain signal to warn of potential tissue damage, and 3) the actual tissue damage itself. In people with normal pain sensitivity, there is a big cushion between feeling no pain and the point at which the alarm bells go off, and a small gap between the warning and real tissue damage. If you’re one of these people, when things are working properly, you don’t hurt unless real damage to the body is about to occur.

But in people who are more sensitive to pain, the gap between no pain and the early pain warning signal is smaller, while the gap between the warning pain and actual tissue damage is much bigger. For these people, fairly benign sensations from everyday activities can be misinterpreted as dangerous threats and trigger a powerful but unwarranted pain signal in response.

The good news is that your pain buffer is malleable. The more you learn to ignore your pain and not indulge the sensation when it presents itself, the bigger your pain buffer becomes. Small insults to the body don’t elicit as strong a pain response. Minor injuries don’t hurt much, and if they do, the pain signal subsides and returns to baseline much faster. All this is to say, if and when you get hurt, don’t panic. You’re almost certainly fine, and catastrophizing pain only makes it more intense, frequent, and long-lasting.



Tweaks, pulls, and other common ailments

There are two types of lifting-related injuries: 1) those that you train through (or around), and 2) those that require surgery. Fortunately, most of them fall into the former category.

There will be times throughout your training career when you wake up and something hurts. It could be your knee, elbow, shoulder, or back, and you may not have any idea why you’re feeling pain. Do not use this pain as an excuse to avoid the gym and skip your workout. In fact, getting under the bar when something hurts is often the best thing you can do.

When a client walks into my gym complaining about any kind of new pain, my response is always the same: “Warm up and see how you feel.” More often than not, once they start moving around and pumping blood to the area, the pain goes away, and they can do their workout as planned. If the pain subsides with movement and activity, the injury is minor.

On rare occasions, however, pain increases during the warmup, indicating that the injury is more acute and needs to be addressed with a rehab protocol or modification of the workout. Injuries like back tweaks, muscle pulls, and tendonitis are the most common lifting-related ailments that may demand more attention.



Back tweaks

Back tweaks are by far the most common injury in the gym. They usually occur on the squat or deadlift when the lumbar spine is not held in proper extension and the surrounding structures of the musculoskeletal system shift under a heavy load. Sometimes the breakdown in technique is obvious, and other times you may start feeling pain with what looks like perfect form. Regardless, the approach to treatment is the same—don’t panic, keep moving, and get back to deadlifting ASAP.

A back tweak usually feels like a sudden pop or an “unraveling” of something in your low back. It doesn’t always hurt right away, but the area will start to tighten up and hurt more over the course of a few hours. Getting out of bed the next morning or standing up from your desk after a period of inactivity can be excruciating. Nonetheless, if you don’t have tingling bolts of electricity shooting down to your feet, and you still have control of your bowels, you didn’t do anything serious.

Based on how badly the tweak hurts, your inclination will probably be to rest it as much as possible. This is precisely the wrong thing to do. If you baby it, the pain will hang around for much longer than necessary. It’s counterintuitive, but you must get back in the gym immediately and start working the area. By doing so, you send a strong message to your brain that says, “Hey, I know you think something is wrong with my back, but I’m fine, so you can let go of the pain and stop making it hurt.” The first time you follow this advice, you’ll be amazed at how quickly you recover.

For the first two to three days after the injury, you should take some ibuprofen and Tylenol as needed (and directed) and move around as often as you can. “Motion is lotion,” and the more you can stand up, do bodyweight squats, and bend down and touch your toes throughout the day (despite the fact that it hurts), the better you’ll feel.

After a couple days, get back into the gym and start deadlifting again. Begin with very light weight—the empty bar or maybe 65–95 pounds. Do a set of 10 reps. When you bend down to grab the bar, it will hurt, sometimes a lot. That’s okay. Just get down there and arch your back a few times until the pain subsides enough to pull the first rep. By the time you get to rep 10, the pain should be almost gone. If the pain gets worse throughout the set, rest a few more days and try again.

If your back feels better as you work through the first set, add a bit more weight and do another set or two of 10 reps. Then keep loading the bar in 25-to-50-pound jumps and drop down to sets of five reps. Work your way up to the heaviest set of five you can. You’ll be surprised how heavy you can go once you’re warmed up. When you pull a set of five at or near the weight that injured you, call it a day. You may need to do this same protocol again a day or two later, but more likely, you’ll find that after one moderately heavy session, your back will feel good enough that you can return to your normal training routine.



Muscle pulls

Muscle-belly tears or “pulls” in the groin or hamstrings are less common than back tweaks, but they do occur. Pulls also feel like a sudden pop or “unraveling” of the muscle fibers. If the injury is severe, a few days later, you’ll develop a bruise under the skin from the internal bleeding. Once again, the correct solution does not involve long periods of rest. In fact, if you avoid moving the injured area, as the body reconstructs the tissue, it will scar, creating a lump of stiff tissue that doesn’t lengthen the way it’s supposed to and is much more likely to tear again.

The correct approach is to rest for a few days and then get back under the bar with very light weight, using high-rep sets (e.g., 3 × 20) of the same exercise that caused the injury. This method reduces the formation of scar tissue by forcing the body to repair the area according to the normal range of motion in which it will be used. For a detailed explanation of the proper approach to healing a muscle-belly tear, look up “the Starr Protocol,” named after its inventor, legendary strength coach Bill Starr.

As a final note, do not massage a muscle-belly tear by foam-rolling it or rubbing it. Think of it like a cut inside your body. If you sliced your arm open with a knife, would you massage it? The wound is trying to close, and your mashing on it only prolongs the bleeding and prevents the tissues from adhering to one another. Massaging a muscle pull does the same thing and often makes the injury worse. Leave it alone for a few days, and when the pain starts to dull, start lifting again with light weights.



Tendonitis

Biceps tendonitis or medial epicondylitis (“golfer’s elbow”) is a common overuse injury that occurs in the elbow at the distal biceps tendon. It often feels like a severe ache in the elbow joint that flares up during squats and carries over into the bench press and press. Tendonitis is an annoying injury and takes a long time to go away. Fortunately, there are several things you can do to address the issue and mitigate the pain. Visit https://www.hornstrength.com/resources for an in-depth video on how to deal with tendonitis.



Surgical situations

In rare cases, injuries can occur that require surgery. Often, these more serious issues are not caused by lifting, but were problems you didn’t realize you had until you started pushing your body to perform beyond your normal daily activities.

Some lifters, for example, will discover they have an inguinal hernia when their deadlift starts to get heavy. Since hernias are primarily a result of your genetics, you can thank mom and dad if you have one. Fixing a hernia usually requires surgery, but it’s a simple procedure with minimal recovery time, and it will solve your problem with almost no chance of recurrence. If you need hernia surgery, get it done right away so you can get back to training as soon as possible.

Rotator cuff and labrum (or SLAP [superior labrum anterior and posterior]) tears in the shoulder are also common injuries that you may have sustained in or out of the gym. The pain associated with this kind of injury usually presents as a sharp, stabbing pain at the bottom of the bench press or overhead press.

I was blessed with what my orthopedic surgeon calls “loose shoulders” and subsequently needed both my labra repaired and the surrounding muscles tightened up to make the joint more stable. Like hernias, large labrum tears will not heal on their own; since there is very little blood supply to the cartilage, the tissue can’t scar and reintegrate itself.

Labrum and rotator-cuff repairs are a bit more involved and have longer recovery times. The former will keep you out of the gym for about two to three months, and the latter, a bit longer. Not all tears require surgery, but again, if it does, get it taken care of right away. I lost over a year of productive training while trying to avoid surgery with acupuncture, massage, Active Release Technique, and other forms of treatment that did nothing to alleviate the problem that the surgery fixed almost immediately.

The same approach goes for meniscus tears in the knee, though these, too, don’t require surgery in every case. Sometimes you can train around the problem, but if it’s bad enough, get it fixed so you can heal up and get back under the bar as soon as possible.

One surgery you should be wary of is lower-back surgery. The outcomes for this type of operation are about as good as not having it done at all, and sometimes the surgery can make things a lot worse. Before you consider lower-back surgery, it’s worth making a solid attempt to get your deadlift nice and heavy. Strong back muscles support the spine better than weak ones, and the number of clients I’ve worked with over the years who reported a significant reduction in low back pain after a few months of regular deadlifting is, at this point, too many to count. Consult with a good doctor and make an informed decision on the best course of action.



Let pain be the guide

Ultimately, when a new injury presents itself, let pain be your guide. If you start to feel better as you warm up, proceed with your workout as normal. If, however, the pain increases and intensifies as you move through your lighter sets, stop, and address it with one of the outlined approaches. But keep in mind that time off from training is almost never the answer. Most injuries heal faster when you make them heal.

One of the more under-appreciated benefits of strength training is that the process desensitizes you to pain. Years spent under the barbell will teach you to ignore many of the common aches and pains that might bother new lifters. With time, you will realize that most injuries resolve on their own in a few days and aren’t worth your attention. Your pain buffer will increase, and you’ll become less sensitive to minor pain signals. Sore knees, elbows, and hips and a sore back may be annoying, but they will not stop you from lifting, and your brain will learn that throwing out pain signals for minor injuries is futile since you’re just going to disregard them anyway.





ILLNESS


Train through a common cold, rest for the flu (or coronavirus). Most colds aren’t a big deal and can be trained through without issue, provided you’re not coughing and blowing snot all over the equipment in a public gym, potentially infecting other people. If, however, you have a fever, body aches, and other flu-like symptoms, training can add unnecessary stress to your body, depress your immune system, and make your symptoms worse. Don’t be a wuss, but don’t be stupid, either. A few days of rest won’t derail your progress much.





LAYOFFS AND LONGER BREAKS


As discussed earlier in the book, one advantage of following a minimalist training schedule is flexibility—especially if you are in the gym only twice a week. Should you need to shift a day forward or backwards because of some extenuating circumstance, you can easily do so and still get all your sessions in for the week.

If, however, you’ll be unable to train for a week or more, don’t stress and let it ruin a nice vacation. You will not lose much of your progress. Strength is a persistent adaptation. Unlike cardiovascular conditioning, which detrains almost immediately, strength training causes structural changes to the body that do not go away quickly.

As a general rule, if you miss a week of training, you can try to repeat the previous week’s weights when you return. If the weights were feeling particularly heavy before your break, or you’ve been out of the gym for more than a week, you may want to back off your top-set weight by 5–10 pounds. If it’s been several weeks, backing off 5%–10% would be more appropriate.

Expect that the first workout back from a layoff will be terrible. Everything will feel awkward and heavier than it should. This occurs not because you’ve lost all your muscle mass (you haven’t), but rather, because the neuromuscular system has detrained, and your body doesn’t remember how to do the movement as well as it used to. You’re rusty.

Take it in stride and do the best you can. After you get back under the bar and push through one crappy session, your body will remember what you want it to do, your neurons will fire more efficiently, and the next workout will feel much better. Do not make the mistake so many new trainees are guilty of and use the layoff as an excuse to take a bunch of weight off the bar. You’ll sacrifice your hard-earned progress for no good reason.





TESTING YOUR STRENGTH





Periodically throughout the program, you will want to see if you’ve reached any of the strength goals outlined earlier in the book. Here’s a reminder of what they are:



Tiers of strength goals.



These targets are based on what you can lift for a single repetition (your one-rep max or 1RM). Since your regular workouts rarely call for fewer than sets of three to five reps, you’ll have to use one of two strategies to determine your 1RM.





ESTIMATE YOUR 1RM


The first option is to estimate a 1RM based on your recent training data. To do this, find your last heavy set for each exercise in your training log, and plug the weight and reps you were able to complete into the following formula:

Weight × Reps × 0.0333 + Weight = Estimated 1RM





If, for example, you squatted 325 pounds for five reps, you would calculate your estimated 1RM like this:

325 × 5 × 0.0333 + 325 = 379





In this scenario, your estimated 1RM would be 379 pounds, which would mean that theoretically, you surpassed a Tier 1 strength goal for the squat. And if your bodyweight happened to be less than 190 pounds, you would also tick off a Tier 2 bodyweight-multiple goal (189 × 2 = 378).

Again, this formula will only give you an estimate. It’s possible that you could hit these numbers, but not probable since performing heavy singles is a skill that must be practiced. To find your true one-rep max, therefore, you’ll need to schedule a testing day and get under the bar.





TESTING DAY


The goal of testing day is to make two or three attempts at setting a new 1RM for each of the four primary lifts (squat, bench, press, and deadlift). Think of it as an informal powerlifting meet. Each attempt will be a little heavier than the next. If you successfully complete the first attempt, you’ll try the next one, then the next, until you find a weight that’s at the limit of your ability. If any one of the attempts is clearly your limit, call it a day, and move on to the next exercise.

Refer to your training log; then calculate your attempts based on the number of reps you successfully completed at your last workout, using the table below.



Calculating weights for 1RM attempts.



Typically, your first attempt should be something you can definitely do, like a weight you’d use for a three-rep max (3RM). At your last workout, for example, if you were able to complete five reps in your top set with 275 pounds, your first attempt on testing day will be 290 pounds (275 × 1.05). If you were able to complete only three reps in your most recent top set, just bump the weight up a little (2.5–5 pounds) so your first attempt represents a small personal record.

Assuming your first attempt is successful, increase the weight by 2.5–5% and make a second attempt. Repeat this process until you find the heaviest weight with which you can complete the rep successfully. Using the same example, a lifter squatting 275 × 5 at his last workout would structure his attempts like this:



Example of calculating weights for 1RM attempts.



Sometimes the first attempt will be all you’ve got. Other times you might get to make a fourth or even fifth attempt. Be conservative. If you think another increase would likely cause a breakdown in form or cause failure, stop, and move on to the next exercise. Be sure to write down your final 1RM so you know what you have to beat on subsequent testing days.

Warm up for testing day attempts using the same approach as you would in a typical workout. Calculate each warmup set based on a percentage of your first attempt.



Calculate your warmups based on your first attempt.



Again, it’s okay to round the warmup weights to increments that are convenient to load on the barbell. They don’t have to be exact percentages.

Rest three to five minutes between your last warmup and your first attempt and between each subsequent attempt. Repeat this process for each of the primary barbell exercises you want to test.

To allow for maximum recovery between upper- and lower-body lifts, I recommend arranging the exercises on testing day like this: press, squat, bench press, deadlift. Alternatively, you can split the exercises into two separate testing days (e.g., Day 1: squat and press; Day 2: bench and deadlift). Make sure to leave at least two days between each testing day if you choose to split them up.

The ideal time to run a testing day is at the end of a gaining phase, before you transition to cutting, or before switching from either the novice to intermediate template or the intermediate to advanced template. It’s unlikely you’ll set any new personal records when calories are restricted and your primary focus is fat loss.

Putting your strength to the test can be a lot of fun. Most of my clients get a little nervous whenever they see a testing day on their schedule, but they always report that it was a positive experience and they’re glad they did it. Many of them go on to sign up for a local powerlifting meet, which adds another layer of excitement and intensity to testing your strength. Knowing you have to perform in front of a large audience is quite motivating.





BUILDING A HOME GYM





For a couple thousand bucks, you can put together an awesome home gym that will allow you to do all the exercises in this program. A home gym is a beautiful thing. You’ll be able to train whenever it’s most convenient, you never have to wait for equipment, and you’ll be free from the annoying bros snapping selfies or doing curls in the squat rack. When you factor in the time and money you’ll save by not having to commute or pay recurring membership dues, setting up your home gym is a great investment, provided you have the space.

Buying home gym equipment can be addictive and expensive if you let it be, but you don’t need much to get started. The essentials include a squat rack, a barbell, weights, a bench, and a few ancillary items. You’ll also need to build a platform for heavy deadlifting, but it’s easy to do and there are lots of how-to guides on YouTube.

The home-gym equipment space has evolved dramatically in the last decade, and new manufacturers are entering the market all the time. A complete, updated list of recommended equipment can be found at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources, but I will mention a few notable suppliers here.

Most of my equipment is from Rogue Fitness. I don’t get any kickbacks or affiliate fees for endorsing their products. At the time I built my gym, Rogue was by far the best equipment manufacturer on the market. Their gear is very high quality, and (despite some recent reports that say otherwise) I’ve always received excellent customer service from their team.

The Strength Co. is a relatively new company that was founded by my friend and fellow gym owner Grant Broggi. Grant is an officer in the United States Marine Corps who started manufacturing equipment during the COVID-19 pandemic when home gyms became more popular and it was almost impossible to find gear. The Strength Co. makes the absolute best iron plates on the market, hands down. They are incredibly accurate (meaning they weigh almost exactly what they are supposed to) and fit more snuggly on the barbell than any plate I’ve ever used. If quality and customer service are important, and you want to support a veteran-owned small business dedicated to making products in America, spend your money at The Strength Co.

My favorite barbell is the 20 kg Starting Strength Bar from Texas Power Bars. It’s also made in the USA and was designed by Mark Rippetoe (author of Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training). The 28.5 mm diameter makes it easy to grip, and the moderately aggressive knurling feels great in the hands. I don’t think there is a finer barbell on the market at this price point.

Finally, for the budget-conscious, Titan Fitness is a solid choice for low-cost equipment. Most of their products are made overseas, and until recently, both their manufacturing and customer service were of such poor quality that I could not endorse them. In the last few years, however, Titan has significantly improved their business. I have several of their items in my home gym and now feel confident recommending them.

Do your research, read reviews, talk to other home-gym owners, and make educated decisions based on your budget. But beware of cheap equipment. Not only is it unsafe, but I’ve also heard countless horror stories from friends and colleagues who tried to save some cash with less expensive alternatives, regretted it, and ended up having to replace their gear anyway. As the saying goes, “Buy once. Cry once.”





USEFUL SUPPLEMENTS





Nutritional supplements are a multibillion-dollar industry, and most of them are a complete waste of money. While you can get everything you need to build an awesome body by sticking with real food, there are a few supplements that can make the process easier and are worth considering.





WHEY PROTEIN


Whey protein is a byproduct of the cheese-making process. I don’t consider it a typical supplement, but see it rather as another source of food. Whey is a water-soluble milk product that typically comes in powder form. It’s a convenient, high-quality, easily digestible source of dietary protein that can be used to augment your meals and make hitting the relatively high daily protein requirement needed to build lean muscle mass much easier.

Whey protein typically comes in two forms: concentrate and isolate. Concentrate is usually less expensive, but it contains lactose. Isolate, on the other hand, includes the lactase enzyme which makes it more tolerable for those (like me) who are lactose intolerant. If consuming dairy products makes you gassy or worse, use isolate.

A good whey supplement will have about 25 grams of protein per scoop and only a few grams of carbohydrates. There are products known as “gainer shakes” on the market that also include a high dose of carbohydrates and thus more calories than you’d get from whey alone. Since you’ll be using whey in both the building and cutting phases of the program, gainer shakes should be avoided.

In my experience, basic flavors like chocolate and vanilla usually taste much better and less “chemically” than crazier concoctions like birthday cake and tropical fruit. A list of some high-quality, palatable options is included at https://www.hornstrength.com/resources.





DEXTROSE


Dextrose is a form of glucose, the body’s preferred source of energy. It’s made from corn and is less sweet than refined sugar. Dextrose is easily mixed with water or your whey protein shake and is absorbed by the body almost immediately, making it an ideal supplement to help fuel your workouts, particularly during a cutting phase when calories and carbohydrates are restricted.

Dextrose is extremely cheap. A typical serving is just two tablespoons (70 calories), and a $25 tub will last you well over a year. If you find that you’re feeling rundown and lightheaded during your training sessions, try adding two tablespoons of dextrose to your protein shake and sipping it throughout your workout.





CREATINE MONOHYDRATE


Creatine is a molecule produced naturally by the body and found in foods like meat and seafood. It provides immediate energy to the muscle cells by replenishing ATP (adenosine triphosphate) for use in short bursts of high-intensity activity (like lifting weights).

Creatine monohydrate is one of the oldest, most well-researched supplements on the market. Countless studies have demonstrated that creatine supplementation improves strength, power production, and recovery time. More recent studies also suggest that creatine may benefit brain function, reduce mental fatigue, and prove effective in preventing certain neurodegenerative diseases (though more research is needed).

Creatine does increase water retention, which has led to the common misconception that creatine will make you look soft and bloated. Studies have repeatedly shown, however, that during creatine supplementation, the additional water being retained is confined within the skeletal muscle cells, making them bigger and fuller. That’s a good thing.

Creatine is not a stimulant. It won’t make you jittery and you won’t feel any different after you’ve taken it. It’s safe, extremely well tolerated, demonstrably beneficial, and cheap, so it’s worth considering.

Creatine comes in a variety of forms, but you should stick with boring old creatine monohydrate in powder form. The recommended dosage is 5 grams per day. It doesn’t matter when or how you take it, but for convenience, just dump it in your daily protein shake.





CAFFEINE


Pre-workout drinks and powders are a huge, profitable segment of the supplement industry. Manufacturers claim that these supplements provide extra energy to get you through your workouts. Historically, the ones that work are usually spiked with powerful stimulants the FDA hasn’t caught onto … yet. For this reason, I don’t recommend using pre-workouts because you will likely become psychologically dependent on them just before they inevitably get pulled from the market.

The less effective (not-yet-banned) pre-workout potions usually contain high doses of caffeine, and there’s no reason to waste your money on a souped-up, expensive form of coffee. Just drink a cup of coffee or two before you train, and you’ll get the same benefits with no fear that your beloved energy-enhancer will suddenly become unavailable.

See the “Recipes” section of the appendix to learn how to make my favorite pre-workout pick-me-up that combines all the supplements mentioned in this section into a delicious drink.





RECIPES





Macros listed are for the highest-calorie preparation, which includes nut butter.





Macros listed are for the highest-calorie preparation, which includes one whole banana sliced on top when serving.



Alternative preparation: Breakfast shake

Combine the same ingredients into a blender for a quick and easy smoothie.





Macros listed are for the highest-calorie preparation, which includes 1.5 cups of rice.





Substituting The Big Beef Bowl

Should you need or want to swap out The BBB, you can easily create an alternative meal with a similar caloric/macronutrient profile by following this simple template:



Use this template as a guide for substituting The BBB.



Using this basic template when dining out, for example, you could order a lean cut of steak or half a roasted chicken, charred broccolini, wild rice, and roasted potatoes. You’ll find there are lots of options for creating healthy, delicious meals while sticking to these parameters. Just keep it “lean and clean” and you’ll be fine.



I prefer to use chocolate–peanut butter protein powder in my shakes, but any whey protein will work. If your meal plan calls for more than one shake per day, you may omit the fish oil in the second serving.





Dextrose can provide a helpful boost when calories and carbohydrates are restricted.





MEAL PLANS





The recipe listed for The Big Beef Bowl will render both daily servings and should be split in half.





The recipe listed for The Big Beef Bowl will render both daily servings and should be split in half.





The recipe listed for The Big Beef Bowl will render both daily servings and should be split in half.





Low-carb days can be used in place of your normal meal plan when fat loss plateaus. To reduce calories even more, eliminate sweet potatoes from The BBB.





SHOPPING LIST





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS





This book would not have been possible without the help of some very important people.

Had Tom Lien and Michael King not dragged my ass to the gym twenty years ago, I would still be a skinny, weak vegan. Thank you for starting me on this journey and burdening me with a lifetime of nutritional neuroticism and crippling body dysmorphia.

I’m eternally grateful to Mark Rippetoe and Stef Bradford, PhD, for giving me the tools, guidance, and occasional kick in the ass I needed to build a successful career as a gym owner and coach. I’d also like to thank the entire Starting Strength community of coaches for their collective wisdom and unyielding dedication to spreading the gospel of barbell training.

Thank you to my training partners/whiskey drinkers, Daniel Gorman and Justin Toner. Your friendship, support, and camaraderie helped me through incredibly difficult times.

A big shout-out to Jason Kelske of Game Time Strength for your kindness and coaching. Our business-bro-down breakfasts were always the highlight of my week.

Were it not for the selfless mentoring of Andy Baker, I would have never “cut the net” and started my business. Thank you for the push and for letting me steal your brilliant programming.

A special thanks to Grant Broggi for being a paragon of grit, determination, and patriotism. Your tireless work ethic and business acumen continue to raise the bar for our industry.

Horn Strength & Conditioning would not have been the special gym that it was without the hard work and dedication of my staff—Agnieszka Oszast, Jon Olmstead, Saul Cervantes, and Daniel Gorman. It was a privilege to watch you develop into amazing coaches and touch the lives of so many clients.

Thank you to Tom Campitelli for bestowing upon me an enduring moniker, “The Legend,” that I have yet to live up to. Your ruthless attention to detail helped sharpen my coaching skills early in my career.

I’d like to reluctantly thank Dr. Jordan Feigenbaum for being the ultimate devil’s advocate and constantly challenging everything I thought I knew (often to the point of painful annoyance). My god, you’re going to hate this book for its lack of “nuance.” Citations desperately needed.

To Matt Reynolds and the Barbell Logic team, thank you for your guidance and wisdom on all things coaching and entrepreneurship. Watching the evolution of your company is a continuing source of inspiration.

Thank you to Peter Gardiner for all the inspiring conversations and fantastic wine. Keep “hunting,” brother!

My brilliant designer and boundless idea generator, Jennifer Horn, deserves much of the credit for the aesthetic of the Horn Strength brand. Thank you for your endless encouragement, trust, and creativity and for letting me turn the garage into a gym and chase this crazy dream.

And to my ever-optimistic cheerleader and sounding board, Sara Steyn, thank you for believing in me even when I didn’t (and sabotaging my diet with your amazing meals).

Most importantly, thank you to all the amazing individuals I’ve been lucky enough to call my clients. I’m beyond grateful that you trusted me with your time and money as I stumbled through the process of figuring this shit out. You taught me more than I could ever teach you and made me into the coach I am today.

Finally, thank you to my loyal German Shepherds, Bob, Mia, and Clint, who each took turns lying patiently at my feet while I typed every word of this book. I’m done now. Go get your ball. We’re going to play.



Clint helping me through the last few pages.





GET IN TOUCH





Thank you for reading this book. I would love to hear about your experience with the program. To connect with me, please use the contact form at https://www.hornstrength.com/contact or visit any of the links below.





